In this connection, I would just mention, for example, the right of entry, the right of establishment, the opportunity to enter the labour market, the coordination of social security systems, the right of establishment for non-gainfully employed people and students, together with new opportunities for cross-border workers.

I want to emphasise, as the rapporteur for the committee responsible pointed out, that it is important for our opinion to be made available before the referendum in Switzerland - not because it is for the Swiss to say 'yes' or 'no' to the opinion, but to show our desire for cooperation, that is to say further cooperation, with Switzerland.

Our committee has pointed out possible future areas of cooperation, for example operations to combat trafficking in women and to combat organised crime and economic crime.

We view these agreements, especially the agreement concerning the free movement of persons, as being very important in the context of cooperation between the EU and Switzerland.

Mr President, I too want to thank the rapporteur for his report and congratulate him.

The Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism as a whole is pleased about this agreement because it was well known how very difficult it was to reach a transport agreement which established a fair balance between competition and the environment and which would also produce a satisfactory solution for both sides.

The two agreements that directly concerned us, and that we have analysed, concern air transport and road and rail transport.

Here we must note, with regard to air transport, that Switzerland is, of course, already a member of numerous international conferences and organisations and has therefore incorporated in its legislation quite a few aspects of what we in the EU regard as the acquis communautaire.

Its adoption of the regulation on the liberalisation packages is the most practically significant measure.

The Transport Committee regards it as a small weakness that the duty-free agreement is not applicable to Switzerland in this case.

The road-rail discussion is a more difficult and also a more interesting one. We think the experiment being proposed here is most interesting.

On the one hand, Switzerland will gradually forego reducing the number of heavy goods vehicles.

It will allow vehicles of 34 to 40 tonnes up to the year 2004; on the other hand, it will abolish the quotas accordingly.

Eventually it will replace this system with a road tax, of approximately EUR 200 on average.

So you can understand why the transport operators are rather critical of that.

And in my view their criticism is fair because we believe these road taxes do not take sufficient account of the fact that the transport operator may invest in environment-friendly lorries.

But what the Transport Committee considered even more important was that this agreement points the way to a transport policy entirely in line with that of the EU: reducing the burden on the roads while supporting transport by rail.

We believe the proposed agreement between the EU and Switzerland is a pilot agreement; the same applies to the analysis of the means by which what we regard as a theoretical transport policy may subsequently be put into practice.

Mr President, the Social Democrats Group and I myself most emphatically welcome this agreement between the European Community, on the one hand, and the Swiss Confederation, on the other.

It is a step in the right direction.

After all, Switzerland is located at the heart of Europe but is not yet a member of the Union.

The conclusion of the bilateral negotiations with Switzerland will put the Union' s relations with Switzerland on a new footing, and we all hope that, in a few weeks' time, the Swiss people will give their assent to these agreements.

But there are a few aspects that still need clarification.

I am not referring to what I usually refer to in this connection, namely closer cooperation to combat tax evasion at the cost of the European taxpayers.

Tonight I will confine myself solely to the question of freedom of movement and will specifically address the subject of cross-border workers.

In all, there are 140 000 cross-border workers in Switzerland who come from Germany, France, Italy and Austria.

These cross-border workers are very seriously affected by the most recent deteriorations in Swiss pension schemes.

Prior to the tenth review of old-age and surviving dependants' insurance there was a so-called spouse' s pension, which was paid without regard to the place of residence of either spouse.

Under the tenth review, which recently came into force, this rule was removed. It was replaced by educational credits, which were, however, tied to residence in Switzerland.

As a result, cross-border workers from the European Union had to pay the same contributions as Swiss residents, but received a 30% lower pension.

The forthcoming eleventh review even provides that only widows resident in Switzerland are entitled to a widow' s pension, which, of course, once again makes the situation worse for cross-border workers from the EU.

Unfortunately, European Union governments have paid too little attention to this issue until now.

I hope all this will change in the near future.

The current rules on old-age and surviving dependants' insurance conflict with the principle of equal treatment and equal status.

Cross-border workers pay in just as much pension insurance as their Swiss counterparts but receive considerably lower pensions.

I hope that this unilateral discrimination by the Swiss Government will be remedied in the wake of this bilateral agreement.

I am extremely grateful to the rapporteur for touching on and bringing up this question in his explanatory statement.

A glance at the map shows that these are probably not the last negotiations and agreements we will see between the Union and Switzerland.

That makes it all the more important to abide not just by the letter but also by the spirit of the agreements we are deciding tomorrow.

For that can only be to the benefit of future negotiations and future agreements which we will be negotiating and deciding bilaterally.

Mr President, the bilateral agreements between the European Union and Switzerland are analogous to the multilateral agreement arrangements that have come into effect within the framework of the European Economic Area.

It is the opinion of the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party that the European Parliament for its own part should support their adoption.

Switzerland' s position illustrates the curious nature of Europe' s present arrangements for integration, and the need to aim to change them, especially now that the EU is expanding throughout the whole of Europe.

The merging Europe has organised itself into a series of concentric rings, at the core of which has been the founder members of the European Union.

First there was the Council of Europe at Strasbourg, which divided in two when France, Germany, Italy and the Benelux Countries formed the European Coal and Steel Community.

The attempt to form a political and defence community came to nothing, but the European Community was created.

The Outer Seven, as opposed to the Six, formed the European Free Trade Association, EFTA.

The expansion of the Six into a Community of, in the first instance, eight, and then twelve, went relatively smoothly.

Since these instances of enlargement, a debate has begun on differentiated integration.

At the end of the 1980s, a plan was drafted in the European Commission whereby the then European Community would consolidate as a federation and the other countries of Europe would join the Single Market via the European Economic Area arrangements.

The first Agreement on the European Economic Area was offered to the EFTA countries.

It was then that concentric circles were being spoken of for the first time.

The EEA Agreement was established, although for Austria, Sweden and Finland it turned out to be a short-lived arrangement.

EEA membership was rejected in a Swiss referendum.

So the only countries remaining in the EEA were Iceland, Norway and Liechtenstein.

Bilateral agreements began to be drawn up for Switzerland.

Negotiations are now under way regarding the future accession of twelve countries to the European Union.

It is strange that neither Switzerland nor any of the EEA countries are among them, although they would be the best suited of all to join.

There is a simple reason for this, however. They do not want to join the present Union, nor that of the foreseeable future.

Now that the Union is growing fast, it is reasonable that it should be subject to internal differentiation.

Just as Jacques Delors, Valery Giscard d'Estaing and Helmut Schmidt, among others, recently proposed, the core countries of Europe should go further along the road towards integration than the others, while the rest of the Union could develop as a confederation of independent states and differentiate.

In this way, we could ease and speed up accession for the countries of Eastern Europe and this would also make membership possible for Iceland, Norway, Liechtenstein and even Switzerland.

Mr President, Mr Väyrynen' s comments just now about concentric circles remind me a little of a hole with circles drawn round it, looking at Switzerland and Europe.

I hope this hole will be filled sometime in the next few years with the accession of Switzerland to the European Union.

For then we would not have to negotiate and decide seven different agreements but all this would be a matter of course.

I very much hope we will make progress in this regard over the next few years.

But perhaps these seven agreements are a preparation for that debate and I very much hope that just as Parliament will be approving these seven agreements by a large majority tomorrow - or so I assume - the Swiss people will also approve them by a large majority on 21 May in order to make it clear that Switzerland is part of Europe.

I would like to say a few words about the agreement on scientific and technological cooperation because I myself have been repeatedly involved in that area of cooperation with Switzerland over the past few years.

I warmly welcome that agreement because basically it means that Switzerland will take part in the European Union' s framework research programme on an equal footing.

To that end, it will pay a contribution in line with its GDP yet participate fully in the programme.

That is a major advantage for both sides.

Yet there is one drawback: it is the European Parliament and the Council that decide the content of this programme, not Switzerland.

That means that Switzerland, like Israel, Norway, Liechtenstein and Iceland, which also take part in this framework research programme, can only participate in something that is decided over their heads.

They have no say as regards its content.

So I would propose that we take our time preparing the sixth framework research programme and that we at least hold informal talks with the Swiss parliamentarians - just as we do with Israel, Norway and so on, i.e. states which do not belong to the EU but which do take part in the framework research programme.

That is something the European Parliament could organise.

Parliament could take the initiative and invite parliamentarians from these countries, so that we can know in advance what input the Swiss can contribute, what problems they may have, what proposals they may have.

In fact, this would also be a step towards bringing Switzerland and the European Union closer together.

I would very much hope we could do that.

Aside from that, let me thank Mr Carraro again for this excellent report.

Anyone who wants to learn will find a great deal of information in his report.

Once again, many thanks and I hope we will adopt it by a large majority tomorrow.

We very much welcome the report by Mr Carraro and his colleagues.

I totally agree with the remarks of the honourable Member, Mr Linkohr, about the quality of the report.

I am also grateful for the authoritative comments made by the honourable Member, Mr Carraro, and by representatives of other relevant committees during this debate and the other contributions we have had as well.

One or two honourable Members have been able to bring in subjects about which they care passionately like the honourable Member, Mr Rübig, and I commend them on their inventiveness.

But it has been a useful debate which has reflected the importance of the subject.

We are extremely satisfied that Parliament has given this verbal approval to the seven agreements with Switzerland.

They are the result of four years of extremely difficult and tough negotiations.

The outcome of those negotiations has been excellent and I am delighted that Parliament has reacted in the way that it has.

They are very important politically and they are very important from a technical point of view as well.

They unblock the stalemate in the relations with one of our closest neighbours and our second biggest trading partner.

They open the way to closer relations and, I hope, to further integration.

Through these agreements the biggest problems in our bilateral relations will be resolved in a number of key sectors: technical barriers to trade, public procurement, research and development about which the honourable Member knows so much, agriculture and air transport.

Equally important, a viable solution has now been found for alpine transit.

The European standard of free movement of persons will also be introduced in relations with Switzerland.

I am glad that Parliament has found the result of the negotiations to be in general so positive but we have also taken note of some more critical remarks, especially regarding cooperation in the fight against transit fraud, cigarette smuggling and other fiscal crimes, where you want to see our Swiss friends doing much more.

Parliament has repeatedly called for better cooperation and the problem will be further investigated I know by a special delegation of the Budget Control Committee.

I want to make it absolutely plain that the Commission shares these concerns.

Losses of several billion euros are caused to the Community budget every year because Switzerland does not apply the relevant Council of Europe protocols on judicial cooperation.

The Commission has repeatedly stated that we see a rapid solution to this problem as the prerequisite for any further agreements in other areas.

It is a point that I am looking forward to discussing with the Swiss Foreign Minister when he comes to Brussels a little later in the summer, as well, I hope, as discussing more positive matters with him.

I want to assure all honourable Members that we have taken account of the detailed concerns that have been expressed in this useful debate and of the other comments that we have received on these negotiations.

As a number of honourable Members have said, the Swiss Parliament has already approved the seven agreements.

They did that in October last year.

We very much hope that the Swiss people themselves will give their blessing in the referendum scheduled for May 21.

It would be constitutionally indelicate I am sure for me to urge them to vote in one way or the other but I do very much hope that these negotiations which have been conducted in good faith and have led to very satisfactory outcomes will be endorsed by the people of Switzerland.

I am sure that the assent of the European Parliament will be very helpful in this respect in encouraging people in Switzerland to vote on May 21 in what we all think would be the right way.

So I very much hope that the vote which the Parliament holds tomorrow does not surprise any of you and does not surprise the Commission either.

The vote will be taken tomorrow at 11a.m.

The next item is the report (A5-0082/2000) drawn up by Mrs Matikainen-Kallström on behalf of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy on the proposal for a Council decision providing supplementary macro-financial assistance to Moldova (COM(1999) 516 - C5-0261/1999 - 1999/0213(CNS)).

Mr President, Moldova bears the heavy burden of communism as do many other newly independent countries that were formerly part of the Soviet Union.

Examined in human and economic terms, Moldova is faring very badly.

The social situation is chaotic and democratic progress painfully slow.

A civil war and the repercussions of the economic crisis in Russia have been paralysing the country for a long time now.

Industry is still underdeveloped and unevenly distributed regionally.

A modest export trade is based on the sale of agricultural produce to neighbouring regions.

A look at the figures will show the level of desperation that exists.

Since 1992, the Moldovan economy has shrunk by almost 70%. Life expectancy has fallen dramatically, and, according to a study undertaken last year by the UN, 50% of the people live below the absolute poverty line.

The Commission deserves praise for having proposed a considerable increase in financial aid to Moldova at the suggestion of the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund.

Bilateral financial aid via the TACIS programme has been reasonably successful.

A big step forward is particularly visible in the areas of local administrative training, the weeding out of corruption, and the promotion of exports and agriculture.

More financial aid must be made available if we are to solve the problem in macro-financial terms. This involves developing democracy and establishing a proper financial and economic policy.

Positive action to develop Moldova must be supported with measures that boost the democratic system.

The Commission must see to it that the additional funding is used properly, flexibly and in a way that strengthens the basic structures of society.

Since the biggest economic problem in Moldova is its dependence on Russia, the new EU aid action must aim at severing this dependence.

For example, Moldova relies totally on Russian imports of energy, and is consequently tied by a leash to Russian energy companies.

The circle can only be broken by establishing Moldova' s own energy sector and the diversification of its export trade.

The other problem with regard to Russia is connected with the withdrawal of troops from Moldovan territory.

The EU must do all it can to make it clear to the Duma that withdrawing Russian troops from Moldova would enhance the country' s stability.

Furthermore, talks on dismantling Russian missiles stockpiled in Moldova must be pushed through immediately.

My report was unanimously adopted in committee.

There were good and sensible additions made to it by the Committee on Budgets.

I hope that this spirit of consensus will be present too in tomorrow' s sitting.

draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Budgets.

(FI) Mr President, as draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Budgets, I would like to draw attention to the economic effects this legal decision will have.

The European Union is granting different forms of economic aid to different countries.

Macro-financial aid is one of the most important, in addition to which equivalent forms of aid can be given in the form of European Investment Bank guarantees and Euratom loans.

There is, however, a ceiling to this provision of loans, which has been determined in interinstitutional agreements.

That is a maximum annual figure of EUR 200 million from the Guarantee Fund.

This causes problems for possible new loans from the European Union, because this ceiling is inflexible.

The present loan and guarantee decisions might lead to a situation where this ceiling is easily exceeded, if something unexpected happens.

I would therefore think that, from the point of view of the Committee on Budgets, it is important that the Commission should make a multiannual assessment of likely future fund requirements, which would serve as a general guide.

The aim should be that Parliament and the Council agree on priorities concerning the use of left-over margins, and that a procedure should be agreed in order to make any changes to these principles.

In the case of macro-financial aid, the Commission appears to have considerable faith in the ability of the international institutions - the IMF and the World Bank - to evaluate the economic situation in whatever countries are concerned.

The role of these institutions is perhaps too important, and the Commission often automatically accepts conditions imposed by others on these loans.

For this reason, I think that Mrs Matikainen-Kallström' s remarks and amendments are very important, as they take account of the fact that such areas as employment and social security should also be examined when determining how the money from loans should be spent.

Mr President, the excellent report by our colleague, Mrs Matikainen-Kallström, on supplementary assistance for the budget of Moldova gives us a rare opportunity to cast our eyes on this small country on the periphery of the European Union, on its economic development and political orientation.

The people once again find themselves living in poverty.

The average monthly per capita income in Moldova is only approximately EUR 30.

Privatisation is making only slow headway and so far the country has not managed to entirely resolve the problem of integrating its Russian minority groups.

It has still not achieved monetary or budgetary stability and Russian occupation troops are still stationed in part of the country, in Trans-Dnestr.

For days now, there has been a very real risk of all the lights going out in Moldova.

The Russian energy company Gazprom suspended gas supplies because Moldova could not pay its bills in German Marks and US dollars.

So we are quite literally witnessing this country' s almost desperate fight for economic survival and political existence.

Geographically, Moldova is a narrow strip of land between Ukraine and Romania. Many young Moldovans are looking towards the European Union.

Some are studying at our universities and technical colleges thanks to funding from the European Union and its Member States. At home, most of them want Moldova to become more open to the European Union.

How can we, the European Parliament, make it easier for Moldova to become more open?

The macro-economic financial assistance, which the Group of the European People' s Party (Christian Democrats) and European Democrats firmly support, is an important step towards building up the necessary confidence in the Moldovan administration system and thereby consolidating its budget.

Moreover, the aid under the TACIS programmes must concentrate more on vocational training, education and improving the totally outmoded transport, communications and energy infrastructure. Small crafts and services businesses can only be started up if there are prospects of improving the framework conditions for competition and investment, which is only feasible in the long term with the help of the European Union.

But Moldova must also know where it wants to go. Does it want to remain in a state of insecurity because it relies so heavily on cheap Russian raw materials, which it cannot even pay for yet, and also remain incapable of reform in many areas, which would mean tying its long-term future to the imponderables of Russian economic and social development?

Or does it want to follow the example of Romania and resolutely tread the long and difficult road of economic reforms and closer cooperation with the European Union?

In that case, it also deserves stronger support on our part.

That support must be conditional on a radical modernisation of its economy and administration. We hope Moldova will opt for renewal and for Europe.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, Mrs Matikainen-Kallström' s report deserves our full support.

She has guided this 'child' in difficult circumstances, for which I thank her.

When we talk of transitional economies we might ask where these economies are really going.

It seems that the direction is not always clear.

Moldova imports all its raw materials from abroad and is very dependent on energy imports.

One tenth of its GNP goes on a bill from just one Russian company, Gazprom, which - as the previous speaker said - is switching out the lights in the state of Moldova.

There is therefore a stranglehold on energy that does not just affect Moldova but also its neighbour, Ukraine; and Belarus, too, for that matter.

Consequently, this phenomenon has a broader political significance, which may create tension in this region, and which we will then have to attempt to relieve.

Moldova' s need for finance will be huge in the years to come.

The Russian crisis on 17 August 1998 had an enormous effect on Moldova.

It has become a ragamuffin state.

The basic pension is just one fifth of the heating costs of one small flat.

No nation can live and function like that.

The balance of trade surplus is a massive 23 - 25%.

As has been said, Russian troops are in the region of Trans-Dnestr, Lebed' s famous 14th army, not all of it, but nonetheless it has some influence.

We obviously support the loan decision and the line the report adopts, the macro-financial assistance, but this will not be enough.

We are taking stability eastwards, so that we will not have to import instability from there.

The next zone of enlargement, the following zone of candidate countries, will be the one we shall have to concentrate on.

We have to create an area of special action, of which Moldova will be a part, and we have to help them.

We therefore have to create an Eastern programme, to run alongside the current round of enlargement, which will help these countries - Moldova, Ukraine, Belarus and Russia - at a stage when we are receiving new members, so that no new curtain falls between these states.

Mr President, I would also like to thank the rapporteur, Marjo Matikainen-Kallström, for preparing a sound report.

She has got to grips with the issue in a comprehensive way and raised some important issues connected with it.

Our Group supports the rapporteur' s views.

As has been said here several times, the situation in Moldova is extremely difficult.

Although a little headway has been made in the areas of administrative development, social pluralism, and human rights, the economic and social situation is still extremely grave.

The country' s economy has shrunk by around two thirds in the last ten years alone.

Discrepancies in income have grown wildly and half the population lives below the poverty line.

Development in Moldova depends essentially on whether the country can achieve political, social and economic stability.

It will be extremely hard for Moldova to overcome its huge problems without foreign assistance.

The Union' s support for Moldova is thus in place.

The EUR 15 million loan now to be made must be coordinated with assistance from the IMF and other international agencies with the aim of boosting Moldova' s social and economic stability.

It is also important that the Commission guarantees the aid by attaching certain economic conditions to it, so that it is used properly in the right areas, for example, in improving administration, organising basic civil services and increasing economic efficiency.

Later, we have to ensure that the conditions have been fulfilled properly and that the country is progressing along the path of democracy and that people' s living conditions are improving.

The report' s proposal for the possibility of revising the financial perspective to increase the amount of funds in the guarantee reserve is also in order.

Mr President, establishing and consolidating a multi-ethnic state is no picnic in political terms.

Moldova is still living proof of this.

Ever since its conception in 1991, it has been faced with intransigent separatism from the Dnestr Republic.

And we ought to remind ourselves of the Russian military presence in that republic, which is again completely at odds with repeated international withdrawal obligations on the part of Moscow.

Faced with a double challenge in internal and external politics between being absorbed by Romania or by Russia, the political élite and the electorate of this small former Soviet Republic opted without hesitation in favour of its own independence in 1994.

It did so precisely because of Moldova' s political unity.

This commendable strategy of phasing out internal and external hotbeds has made room for, among other things, the autonomous statute of the minority population of the Gagauz and the border treaty with neighbouring Ukraine which is less than one year old.

These achievements, however, cannot begin to conceal Moldova' s extremely difficult transformation process from ex-Soviet Republic to democratic constitutional state based on a social market economy.

In terms of energy supply and a market for its goods, Moldova is extremely dependent on the Russian Federation. As such, Chisinau is looking to the West for financial support for modernisation.

Hence the present, third request for macro-financial support from the European Union.

Given the level of exchange rate stability and internal currency stability achieved by Moldova, I can go along with this. However, I have two questions.

What has been the effect of the European Union' s two previous capital injections into that country?

Could the Commission be specific about this?

Also, Amendment No 1 tabled by the competent Committee seems to clash with the objective of this specific long-term loan.

Needless to say, I too much prefer giving the average Moldovan citizen financial support rather than lining the pockets of the Gazprom bigshots!

Mr President, I should like to extend a warm thank you to Mrs Matikainen-Kallström for the effort she has put into this report.

The European Union is prepared to invest EUR 15 million, equivalent to SEK 120 million, in a long-term loan.

The desire is for this to be given to Europe' s poorest country, which has a gross national product as low as that of the poorest countries in Africa.

Moldova is a country where the community, or society, has abdicated responsibility in a number of areas.

The average wage among State employees is MDL 230, which is to say approximately SEK 150 or about EUR 19.

The lowest pension is a mere quarter of this, or MDL 64.

Because the State' s finances have been completely undermined, neither State employees nor pensioners receive their payments on time.

Many have to wait for over a year for their money, and sometimes even longer.

Moldova is a deeply tragic example of the devastating consequences of Soviet Communism, an appalling ideology which has destroyed whole societies, countries and peoples spiritually, morally, socially and economically.

What we see fully revealed here is the harvest of the dragon' s teeth sown by communism.

According to the Swedish professor, Per Ronnås, Moldova has seen a more devastating peacetime fall in its standard of living than any other country in modern times.

At the same time, all the intelligence about people' s exposure to extensive torture by the police, involving electric shocks and suffocation with the aid of plastic bags placed over the head, is a very serious source of concern.

Moldova is today experiencing general migration.

A quarter of the country' s four million people are estimated to have travelled abroad in search of work.

Many poor and destitute girls have ended up in the hands of crime syndicates which degrade them and exploit them sexually.

We can do nothing other than support this country, Europe' s very poorest.

Mr President, I would firstly like to thank Mrs Matikainen-Kallström for her report and all of you for the sensitivity you have shown with regard to such a serious problem as Moldova.

I note that the sensitivity of the different political groups is in line with the sensitivity of the Commission when it made the proposal for supplementary macroeconomic assistance for Moldova and, in this respect, we are especially grateful for their support.

It is true that today, we are talking about macro-financial assistance, therefore, with clearly defined objectives, which will undoubtedly improve the financial room for manoeuvre so that we can tackle the other difficulties such as those which you have raised during tonight' s debate.

Of the amendments presented in the report, the Commission has no difficulty in accepting Amendments Nos 1 to 4 referring to the final objective of the aid, the need for a coherent approach in our various instruments for Community assistance and the need for social balance in that assistance.

Therefore, the Commission will support these amendments in the Council and I hope they can be taken forward.

Nevertheless, I would suggest to the rapporteur and honourable Members that they reflect further on the remaining amendments.

Amendments Nos 5, 6 and 8 advocate the establishment of a new committee to control this type of aid.

In our opinion this initiative would be excessively bureaucratic and would not make sense.

Macro-financial assistance is usually granted for periods of one year, it is not always renewed, it is granted in different areas, different countries, according to the circumstances and we believe, therefore, that the current system of concentrating its control in a particular body, the Economic and Financial Committee, makes sense since this is the group of people with the greatest experience and knowledge of the control and management of this type of aid.

I would remind you that the Economic and Financial Committee is not a normal committee. It is a committee provided for in the Treaties which, in practice, consists of personal representatives of the Ministers for Economic and Financial Affairs.

In our view these are the people who really have the ability to carry out this management.

The creation of specific ad hoc committees would achieve less and would not be as effective as the current model.

I would also like to make another comment on Amendment No 9, which asks us - and I suspect that it also coincides with Mr Belder' s demand - whether we can provide information on the effectiveness of aid.

We agree that the Commission should report on what we must do, but what causes us difficulty is the idea that this should be done before 15 September.

By definition, macro-financial assistance includes a series of general economic indicators, which are not always available at that time.

In some cases they will be available to us, in other cases they will not.

We think it is much more reasonable that the Commission' s obligation should refer to the whole year and that we should be allowed greater room for manoeuvre between 15 September and 31 December to present these reports. We believe they will be of better quality if we have additional time available to us.

The Commission' s concern, as I see it, that it should be provided with figures for the budgetary debate should not cause any difficulty, since every six months, a report is sent to the budgetary authority on the guarantees covered by the general budget along with an annual report on the management of the Guarantee Fund.

By means of both reports, the Commission will have access to all the necessary budgetary information.

Nevertheless, in order to assess the aid we should be allowed more time.

Lastly, I would like to make a comment on Mr Seppänen' s concerns regarding the budgetary availability of resources for this type of aid.

In our view, there is no difficulty. We believe that this type of aid can be dealt with by means of the current budgetary resources.

It is true that, in the future, we will possibly have to debate whether the current priorities and our financial room for manoeuvre are coherent or not, but we do not think that this is a debate which can be held in relation to a specific report; rather it will require a much more profound and more general debate, which we will be happy to take part in at this Parliament' s convenience.

The vote will be taken tomorrow at 11 a.m.

(The sitting was closed at 10.55 p.m.)

Adoption of the Minutes of the previous sitting

The Minutes of yesterday' s sitting have been distributed.

Mr President, I would like to make a correction to my statement on the EC/Switzerland agreement, because since 1 May this year, Mr Jörg Haider has been neither a member of the government nor the leader of Austria' s Freedom Party.

As such, the grounds for the sanctions imposed by the 14+1 on one Member State should be rescinded immediately.

Mr President, I would like to make the following comment in connection with the Minutes: reference was made in the Maat report on school milk yesterday to the fact that the Community' s contribution to financing shall be equal to 75% of the target price.

It says 65% in the German version of the Minutes.

Would you be so kind as to check again whether the various language versions are all in order?

Mr Goepel, the services have already informed me of this error and all the versions will be corrected.

The next item is the report (A5-0096/2000) by Mrs Fourtou, on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market, on the Commission' s Green Paper 'Combating counterfeiting and piracy in the single market' .

Mr President, I would like, above all, to thank the Commission for appreciating the risk involved in the phenomenon of counterfeiting and piracy.

Their Green Paper initiative is a clear demonstration of their determination to tackle the problem, and I should also like to thank my colleagues on the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market and on the committees whose opinion was requested, who have made a considerable contribution to the enrichment of my work.

Piracy and counterfeiting constitute a risk to consumer health and safety. Spare parts for cars and aircraft, toys and pharmaceutical products, all of which endanger the lives of consumers, are to be found on the counterfeit market.

Piracy also jeopardises innovation and the very future of certain firms.

By way of example, I would cite the hundreds of thousands of jobs lost every year within the European Union due to this.

Counterfeiters take advantage of the investments made by bona fide industry in new product research and development and in advertising.

This also undermines the fiscal resources of the state authorities.

Finally, it has been established that this phenomenon is often closely linked to organised crime.

My report advocates a coordinated overall approach in order to combat piracy and counterfeiting. This approach has two aspects: prevention and law enforcement.

If we are to prevent this scourge, we must first familiarise ourselves with it.

We therefore propose an extensive public awareness campaign, with whatever programmes the Commission can suggest, and increasing awareness among the police, judicial and customs authorities.

We plan to set up training schemes for these authorities and a cooperation plan involving the exchange of know-how and adoption of best national practice.

Prevention must also involve strengthened cooperation between the private and public sectors, and the legal protection of technical arrangements, while obviously respecting consumer rights.

Indeed, making allowances for consumer rights and the legitimate demands of professionals is one of the difficult aspects of this report.

Of course, each Member State has its own internal regulations for law enforcement.

In order to make them more effective, we must endeavour to harmonise current legislation and thereby remove the disparities between protection systems.

Obviously, penal sanctions must be made more stringent and civil measures and procedures must be simplified.

The approximation of the penal sanctions applied by different nations in the case of customs offences is certainly desirable.

It will also be appropriate to pay particular attention to matters of international judicial cooperation.

To conclude this brief overview of my report, I shall say that the effective protection and implementation of intellectual property rights must be an absolute priority in negotiations with countries seeking accession to the European Union and in all relations with third countries.

I shall add that we should try, in our plenary sitting, to preserve the consensus which emerged in committee when voting on this report, in order to ensure that the European Parliament thereby gives a strong political message as to its commitment in the fight against counterfeiting and piracy.

And finally, I appeal to the Commission, which I hope will submit its proposed action programme for responding to the urgent nature of this phenomenon in the very near future.

Since the matter would indeed seem genuinely to be one of absolute urgency, especially as regards piracy in the audiovisual media, the Commission must not fail to respond in a decisive and urgent manner.

Mr President, I want to congratulate Mrs Fourtou on this important report.

It is important both in terms of the functioning of the single market and, most importantly, for the protection of consumers.

It is right that we should focus on the way in which counterfeiting is growing between the Member States, within the single market, as well as beyond the frontiers of the European Union.

The consumer can be conned by counterfeiting in all circumstances very easily but it is always a menace.

It is a menace because the counterfeit product carries none of the necessary guarantees of safety and quality which come from a product which the manufacturer can stand by and endorse.

It can be dangerous to health.

It can certainly be dangerous to innovation.

It can be dangerous for the future of research.

There is very little to be said for the counterfeiter except that, at best, he or she is a parasite upon productive industry.

This is not a victimless crime.

We are talking about things that seriously damage the marketplace.

For that reason, the Environment and Consumer Policy Committee takes much the same line as the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee in supporting and endorsing this report.

Naturally the point we would wish to make in conclusion, however, is that in protection of the consumer, the provision of information must involve consumer organisations within the Member States themselves.

They are best placed to pick up some of the worst scams which now prevail and inform the public that what may, at first sight, appear to be a bargain, is really a snare and delusion.

My second point has been touched upon by the previous speaker.

It is this: there are those who would say that this debate embraces the debate about copyright and trademarks.

A number of amendments from the political groups and the committees have tried to make this clear.

There is a debate going on - and the Commissioner knows perfectly well about this - about parallel imports and whether these are now being used in some cases in a way which is damaging to trade, anti-competitive and against the interests of the consumer.

We do not want to see these two debates confused.

What we are attacking here in this proposal, and quite rightly, is those who, by the parasitic practice of counterfeiting, batten upon the public, confuse and deceive it and can sometimes actually damage society in the process.

Mr President, I am pleased to see Parliament, in the form of Mrs Fourtou' s report, prepared to undertake an extensive campaign against counterfeiting and piracy within the internal market.

The text gives an accurate outline of the extent of the damage and its catastrophic repercussions on the economies of our countries and also on the health and safety of our fellow citizens, since the phenomenon now involves sectors as potentially dangerous as medicines and car parts.

We can therefore welcome this appeal for increased awareness and for a uniform mobilisation of resources across the board in order to limit and eventually curb this scourge.

While the Fourtou report does not appear to play down the significance of the damage, it does, however, appear to disregard the urgency requiring that an appropriate policy is implemented straight away.

Reading this text gives the impression that Parliament is urging the Commission to consider with the utmost urgency the technical definition of the measures which should be implemented, whilst in this respect the counterfeiters are, as always, one step ahead in terms of technology.

If it is appropriate to use any more sophisticated technology that might make counterfeiting and piracy more expensive and more difficult to engage in, then the fight we undertake should not neglect to use radical means, applicable immediately. Failing to do so would mean that our policies, however well intentioned, will be forever missing the boat.

The text is still particularly vague as to the measures to actually protect patents and intellectual property rights which it would like to see Member States adopting. Without such measures, crafty economic opportunists and seasoned technological plagiarists will continue to pass well-disguised theft off as innovation.

Similarly, something is amiss when we are striving for a raft of protective measures, which would make it possible to put an immediate stop to the sale of these goods, while there are reasonable grounds for suspicion and when the only thing lacking is the time needed to furnish proof.

In addition to all the necessary schemes intended to combat the sale of these fraudulent goods, however, it is essential to cut off the supply of these goods pouring into the single market, flouting all the principles which are supposed to regulate its operation.

And in order to do so, Parliament must agree to remove the veil of doctrine which blurs the vision of the great majority of its Members when it comes to incontrovertible evidence of the need to re-establish internal border controls within the Community.

It would also have been wise to specify in some form other than the desperately vague paragraphs 31 and 34 exactly what obligations would be required of candidate countries on the subject.

Finally, and this is certainly the most serious issue, what cooperation policy do Member States intend to implement as of now in order to fight not only against the fly-by-night street trader, but more especially against organised crime, which nowadays apparently is becoming the real beneficiary of this expanding sector of activity?

The Union for a Europe of Nations Group will vote in favour of this report, even though it represents only the first minimal step in a Community-wide policy in which each Member State must take hard and fast action, and urges Parliament to vote in favour of its amendments, which would make it possible to give the text much more force than it has at it stands.

Mr President, this report is extremely late in coming, given that the Commission' s Green Paper was adopted on 15 October 1998.

It is true that, in the meantime, we have had the elections to the European Parliament, but if consultation with Parliament regarding a Green Paper takes more than a year and a half, something is not working as it should, and Parliament and the Commission should therefore review their methods for cooperation so that this issue can be resolved more speedily.

The Green Paper is, of course, a good one.

It was well received by the various parliamentary committees and Mrs Fourtou has produced a good report that was adopted almost unanimously by the Legal Affairs Committee, with 23 votes for and one abstention.

The opinions of the various committees are also favourable and have been well received; the opinion of Mr Berenguer Fuster, on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, the opinion of Mr Whitehead, on behalf of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, and the opinion of Mrs Montfort, on behalf of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy.

The Legal Affairs Committee has incorporated most of the proposals made by the various committees asked for an opinion.

What is important is that we are moderate and restrained when it comes to adopting the report.

The Union for a Europe of Nations Group, for example, has tabled amendments which may affect the internal market.

Specifically, I think that Amendment No 6, tabled by Mrs Thomas-Mauro, which requests that border controls be established at internal borders, is extremely dangerous.

The purpose of this kind of initiative is not to rebuild the borders that we have already removed, and that is one of the reasons why Mr Berenguer Fuster and myself have tabled Amendment No 9, which is designed to prevent internal controls from being re-established by clamping down on piracy.

We must ensure, for example, that by clamping down on piracy, we do not contravene the agreements on the liberalisation of the internal market in matters of distribution. We must also prevent this provision, as Mr Whitehead said earlier, from leading to the regulation of all intellectual property rights, in the area of patents, for example, which is why we reject some of the amendments.

To sum up, I think that the report is a good one, but I would draw your attention to one issue: when we discuss the conditions for accession of the candidate countries, we must attach particular importance to the issue of the protection of intellectual property and protection against piracy.

In the accession negotiations, it must be made clear to candidate countries that the issue is extremely important to us and is, of course, extremely important to relations with third countries, since the development of international trade must be based on the recognition of the protection of intellectual and industrial property.

Mr President, this is a useful draft legislative provision.

We must dress the wounds suffered by European industry, amounting to millions of euros (though the movement of the euro may relativise such a figure).

We must consider the implications of these inferior quality products for consumers.

We must find the means to curb the globalisation of counterfeiting and piracy.

This text illustrates our inability to regulate the internal market since we eliminated internal border controls within the European Union.

The fact is, establishing a single market without internal borders, without these safety valves which, in the final analysis, would not disturb the ordinary citizen, offers an area which is a sheer delight, and a profitable one at that, for criminals of every kind.

Modern-day pirates, come to Europe, the only risk you run is that of a few spot checks being carried out by customs officials looking for the needle in the European haystack!

In this respect, the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy was indeed well advised and insightful when it adopted the opinion, since it adopted the amendments I tabled.

Admittedly, candidate countries must undertake not to counterfeit or make pirate copies of our services (only, perhaps, of our values) but we should also consider the countries with whom we sign customs agreements.

Should the aforesaid undertaking not be a condition sine qua non?

Moreover, let us not be naively optimistic. A totally free area cannot be created until the structures to monitor this freedom are ready.

I wished to point this out in my Amendment No 6, which was adopted within the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy.

Customs controls at the internal borders of Member States, in this specific context, do not represent a barrier to the single market but, quite the opposite, offer protection as regards the jobs, health and safety of European Union residents.

In adopting this very important amendment, realistic and constructive Members of Parliament will be cultivating the art of good border management.

We must ensure that the European Union is not replaced by a poor quality counterfeit which would leave our States vulnerable to cross-border crime and which would be to the detriment of its inhabitants.

Mr President, I have the impression that, by following the Commission in laying too much emphasis on the internal market, many of my fellow Members have not grasped the real scale of this phenomenon.

Our markets are adversely affected by counterfeiting and piracy, as are all world markets.

It would, therefore, be a dangerously narrow approach to confine ourselves too much to the single market, suggesting that the entire solution could be found there.

I should also like, at this Green Paper stage, to stress the fact that such illegal activities, when they affect pharmaceutical products, spare parts and toys, constitute a very real risk to human health and safety.

And I appeal to reason to ensure that the attempts to reconcile national approaches do not compromise the arrangements already in place in our national states.

I foresee the risks of allowing harmonisation to become an end in itself.

Given the real risk of losing focus, I should like to issue a warning to the Commission.

Rather than on the counterfeiting of garden gnomes which it mentions, we should be concentrating on protecting patents, trademarks and copyright, which make it possible to guarantee consumer protection as well as ensuring the continued existence of firms that undertake significant investment up front in research and development and in the manufacture of quality products.

Many jobs in the textile sector, the automobile industry and the sphere of culture also depend on these.

Let us be serious about this.

Software protection within European or national administrations requires much more than a code of conduct, but rather the strict observance of regulations, and I hope that the Commission will acknowledge that this is more a matter of determination to adopt sound managerial practices than of the introduction of a harmonised arsenal of legislative and criminal law measures.

Mrs Fourtou' s report is valuable because it provides an important gloss on the Commission' s green paper 'Combating counterfeiting and piracy in the single market' .

This document clearly sets out the importance of intellectual property in the contemporary world and the damage that theft of that property can do.

While many people quite rightly consider that burglary is wrong, there is not somehow the same feeling about, for example, the illegal taking and using of intellectual property, for example, pirated CDs or using Napster to get other people' s music off the Internet.

But, of course, there is no fundamental difference between the two.

In some ways the most interesting challenge posed by these relatively new forms of crime are the means of countering them.

Clearly, in any pan-national single market, measures cannot be confined to a single Member State' s jurisdiction but it does not automatically follow that the correct answer is European-wide harmonisation of penalties, criminal law and procedures.

There is undoubtedly an overriding requirement for coordination and a single strategy to deal with the counterfeiters and pirates, but the principles of mutual recognition have not, in my view, been given the prominence I would like to have seen in the conclusions to the report.

This tends to emphasise the need to harmonise more than is appropriate or necessary in the circumstances.

However, having said that, it is important for the European Union' s judicial area to have a coherent and comprehensive framework for dealing with the problems of counterfeiting and piracy which is widely carried out both within and without the Union by increasingly determined and technologically sophisticated criminals.

We are often glibly told, rightly in fact I believe, that we are moving into a knowledge-based society.

We therefore cannot allow that knowledge to be stolen from those to whom it belongs as doing that will undermine the economic base of the society.

If that happens, we allow it to happen at our peril.

The vote will take place at 11 a.m.

The next item is the report (A5-0111/2000) by Mr Laschet, on behalf of the Committee on Budgets, on the proposal for a Council Regulation on support to bodies set up by the international community after conflicts, either to take charge of the interim civilian administration of certain regions or to implement peace agreements.

Mr President, this specific proposal concerns support for those bodies which the international community must unfortunately establish now and again, either to take care of interim civilian administration in regions affected by conflict or to implement peace agreements.

As a Union, we must, of course, assume long-term responsibility for this type of task in Europe.

We are already involved in two cases, through the High Representative for Bosnia-Herzegovina and through the EU' s participation in the UN' s transitional administration in Kosovo.

The major part of the EU' s operations in Kosovo, for example, will, of course, be concerned with actual reconstruction, but the EU must, naturally, also assume responsibility for those bodies which are required if there is to be a return to a society with a functioning civilian administration, able, in the long run, to become a democratic society cooperating closely with both the EU and the other Balkan countries.

It is equally obvious that responsibility must be shared fairly between different international players and that there must be correct and detailed regulations relating to how this is to take place.

In this regard, I nonetheless feel a certain unease.

We are receiving more and more information about an unduly small proportion of the EU' s aid to Kosovo in fact going to practical reconstruction and an extremely large proportion of those resources we have allocated for the year 2000 being spent in other ways.

Administration of the reconstruction bureau, which is also an important measure, is one such item of expenditure, but here we are also concerned with, for example, budgetary aid and energy imports.

We are not questioning the significance of these measures, but it is rather alarming if the cost of those operations which constitute the EU' s main task is actually much lower than the 360 million which has been allocated.

More information is required in this area.

In order that the work can be executed quickly, and in the absence of a legal basis, the Council has so far chosen to take a decision on the measures within the framework of the common foreign and security policy.

In accordance with the present proposal, this type of measure is now to be transferred to the first pillar.

We therefore demand a rethink, firstly of the legal basis for the aid provided by the Union and, secondly, of the way in which we are actually to use those resources which have traditionally been allocated within the sphere of foreign policy but which belong, rather, under the first pillar and Category 4.

There appear to be a number of gaps in this area.

If the Commission' s proposal and the Council' s wishes are to be complied with and a new budget item created, and if this is, moreover, to be provided with additional net financing, it will be necessary to consult Parliament and carry out a proper budget procedure.

I want to be clear on this point: it is not a question of Parliament enjoying the prestige of being able to express its opinion on these questions, but of our now having to realise that these tasks are not of an interim character but are to be more long term in nature.

Where operations are concerned, we must have a method which is fast and legally correct and which permits transparency, and we must therefore have a more regular budgetary procedure.

There must be a great readiness to engage in continued operations of this kind.

We must therefore also clarify the way in which the budget is managed, together with the legal basis for the aid. In this way, disputes about these matters will not become obstacles to constructive operations.

On the whole, I believe that transparency and public scrutiny are important elements of the measures which need to be taken in future.

However, these must be combined with speed and efficiency.

In an area like Kosovo, decisions cannot be made on operations which are to be delayed for a long time, because the situation may already have had time to change.

We should establish conditions for how the resources concerned are to be used, but we should not have procedures which are so complicated that the EU is accused of inefficiency or that important reconstruction operations are delayed.

It is therefore important that support for the type of body we are now talking about should be accompanied by special agreements concerning how the money is to be used and that there should be subsequent proficient monitoring of the quality of the operations concerned.

Moreover, we must subsequently be given detailed reports on how, for example, the transitional administration is working.

There are positive features to be mentioned.

Even if the EU sometimes comes in for criticism, it is worth mentioning that the EU' s task force has received a lot of praise for the efficiency it has shown.

We only hope now that this efficiency really can also be transferred to the more permanent work in the reconstruction bureau and to the EU' s operations within the framework of UNMIK.

I want to emphasise that considerable freedom of action at local level is required, but we must, of course, be able nevertheless to check that the resources are being used correctly.

The present proposal also contains a new budget item of EUR 27 million.

This is to be accommodated within Category 4 which, in turn, of course, also gives practical expression to yesterday' s proposal from the Commission for a review of the budget in order to accommodate the more long-term support for democratisation and reconstruction in the Balkans.

The Committee on Budgets has a large number of questions regarding these figures.

There is a definite desire on the part of Parliament to come up with the aid required and we are aware that the needs are very great indeed.

We must also focus on the needs of the Balkan peoples, but then it is the task of Parliament and of the other branches of the budgetary authority to find the technical solutions to the financing requirements.

I think that the sum of 27 million we are talking about here emphasises the need to review the budget.

I believe that most people judging the issue, possibly with the exception of the Council, would consider it impossible to use this aid in its entirety within the framework of the budget' s current Category 4.

It is unreasonable that support for other poor regions in the world should be affected by the problems in the Balkans.

To sum up, I think that we must now give more consideration to the quality of the operations.

Now that the Commission is presenting both the budget for implementation and this new way of dealing with the support for establishing the EU' s part in the civilian administration, it is important that we should not focus solely upon the overall figures or the formal decision-making processes.

It is at least as important to evaluate the operations and to make sure that these are implemented swiftly and efficiently.

In general, it is now being said that the implementation in Kosovo is more effective than in Bosnia, but there are still plenty of new issues which ought to be investigated.

The whole of this discussion shows how closely foreign and security policy is bound up with Parliament' s role in, for example, the budgetary procedure.

In this regard, we must develop a model for guaranteeing that aid is put together correctly and transparently in accordance with our regulations and in such a way that it can also be examined and reviewed, as Mr Staes pointed out.

These considerations must not lead to the aid programme becoming bogged down in vague decision-making processes.

Against this background, we support the Laschet report.

Mr President, Mr Laschet has produced an excellent report on a very technical subject, going into great detail and discovering certain features connected with the subject which have been discussed during this debate.

For this reason, I would like to congratulate him on his splendid work.

Parliament is considering a proposal for a Council Regulation on a basis for financing the UN operation in Kosovo, UNMIK, and the costs of the High Representative for Bosnia-Herzegovina.

The intention is to transfer these appropriations from the common foreign and security policy in the second pillar to the first pillar, to be financed from the Commission' s budget.

Although this would appear to be a purely technical measure, there are certain problems associated with it.

The first concerns Category 4. Category 4 is already overloaded.

For this reason, the Commission proposed yesterday that the financial perspective be revised and that there should be substantial use of agricultural appropriations for external action.

This transfer will bring with it a considerable need for additional financing in Category 4.

If the proposal for a regulation were to be adopted without amendment, it would mean that there would be a syphon for transferring second pillar funds to the first pillar in Category 4, without consulting Parliament.

For this reason, the regulation must be amended so that Parliament may maintain its power of influence.

This syphon has to be blocked, so the annex to the proposal should be deleted and the amendments the Committee on Budgets is proposing should be adopted.

The proposal should therefore be restricted at this stage of the proceedings to just two situations: financing the UN operation in Kosovo and the costs of the High Representative for Bosnia-Herzegovina.

Thirdly, if the funding of special envoys is transferred in future to the Council' s administration budget, as is supposed, it will mean that the gentlemen' s agreement between the Council and Parliament will have to be reviewed.

Under this agreement, the Council and Parliament do not interfere with the content of each other' s budget.

If, however, what are clearly operational appropriations, such as those for financing the work of special envoys, are transferred to the Council' s budget, they will no longer be serving to fund the Council' s administrative expenses, but rather providing common financing of the work of the European Union.

For this reason, these funds can no longer fall within the scope of the gentlemen' s agreement: the European Parliament must have the right to express its opinion and to influence the use of appropriations for financing the work of special envoys, even though they may have been included in the Council' s administrative budget.

The proposal for a Regulation may, as far as I can see, be adopted only if the Commission, and the Council too, accept Parliament' s amendments, since, otherwise, the proposal will go against the present interinstitutional agreement.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I too would like to express our Group' s support for the rapporteur' s report.

It is quite clear that we need to strengthen the powers of the Commission and of Parliament in matters relating to aid for Bosnia, because past experience has shown that this is fraught with problems.

There is the report from the Court of Auditors for a start, but there are also the experiences of the delegates of the last legislature, and particularly Edith Müller, who kept on probing in Bosnia-Herzegovina, because it had become apparent that people' s sense of responsibility was nowhere near what is should have been when it came to the deployment of resources, spending money, investigations and the discharge procedure.

Transferring actions to the first pillar increases the likelihood of the Commission and Parliament being able to exert a great deal more influence over the allocation of funds, to carry out their responsibilities, and also check up on what becomes of the funds in the discharge procedure.

Firstly, this means that we will be able to make it clear to the European taxpayer that we are going to heighten the European institutions' sense of responsibility when it comes to spending money.

However, we will also - and I think this is at least as important - be setting the course for an important development, and I am with Mr Brok every step of the way on this point.

I believe it is absolutely vital for us to make it clear, in view of the fact that foreign policy is constantly gaining in importance within Europe, that the European institutions must be strengthened and that it is not for the Council alone to bear responsibility; rather it must be made clear, by increasing the level of responsibility of the Commission and Parliament, that we want to assume responsibility for foreign policy and that we also want to be involved in shaping policy in this sphere.

Mr President, the proposal for a regulation aims to provide a legal basis for transferring the financial contribution from the CFSP to the budget for the first pillar, which we consider a positive move, since Parliament' s lack of monitoring powers over the CFSP itself is a disgrace.

The draft resolution and the amendments therefore quite rightly stress the need to step up supervision of all operations to fund what are euphemistically called bodies in receipt of aid, in order to avoid any mention of a protectorate.

This is what is really at issue in Bosnia or in Kosovo.

The resolution indeed is silent on the key issue, which is the validity of the policy implemented in the former Yugoslavia.

What is the state of affairs, five years on, in Bosnia-Herzegovina?

How is the outcome of the war in Kosovo to be appraised?

How much did the military intervention cost?

How much did the destruction cost?

Through an 80% increase in the 2001 budget, the peoples of Europe are being asked to foot the bill for the parties that caused the destruction and that now want to embark on reconstruction, for the greater profit of a few industrialists.

But who do they think they are kidding when those self-same Heads of State that conducted the war are now causing living conditions everywhere to deteriorate and making employment less secure?

What is more, the planned solutions to assist these protectorates are problematic and harmful.

For example, the level of the wages handed out to international organisations only serve to undermine these regions further.

For example, and this is still more tragic, there are still no effective controls on the distribution of aid.

Even the Committee on Budgetary Control is stressing the serious abuses in the management of European Union aid to Bosnia-Herzegovina.

The deutschmark is foisted on Kosovo, and the law of the market prevails.

As far as we are concerned, the outcome of the military intervention speaks for itself.

The ethnic divide is becoming entrenched, at the same time that an ungovernable protectorate is being set up which is seeking to deny the Kosovars independence without, for all that, being capable of applying the hypocritical framework of UN Resolution 1244.

For all these reasons, unlike my fellow Members who have spoken so far, we will be unable to vote in favour of a resolution which makes only marginal improvements to a disastrous policy.

The vote will take place today at 11 a.m.

(The sitting was suspended from 10.35 a.m. until the vote at 11 a.m.)

Ladies and gentlemen, let me welcome, on your behalf, a delegation from the Maltese Parliament, which is currently visiting our institution.

Ladies and gentlemen, welcome to the European Parliament. We hope that, despite your very heavy schedule, you will have the opportunity to meet many of the Members of this House, and that your visit will be a productive one, helping relations between your country and the European Union to progress.

- (FR) Today, Parliament adopted the common position on the legal aspects of electronic commerce as it stands.

Everyone will acknowledge the value of clear regulations in a continually developing field where the economic and legal stakes are considerable.

I shall not dwell on aspects which have already been extensively discussed.

I should like at this point to return to one aspect I consider more fundamental.

Today we are setting regulations, quite rightly, for the litigation which may arise from impersonal, and therefore risky, electronic commercial transactions.

It is now imperative that we consider what steps we can take in advance to prevent such problems arising and, in order to achieve this, primarily combat the rationale according to which, in a world which is losing its most sacred ethical standards, e-commerce should be just another phase in the development of an unregulated society and one which therefore, as we can observe, inevitably places the very weakest at a disadvantage.

There is no question here of banning an extraordinary instrument of culture and openness.

What we have to do is be as demanding with this as we are, legitimately, with any other form of trade.

And now we are getting to the heart of the matter: e-commerce and, more generally, the Internet, are the expression of a society without legitimate and, ultimately, human territorial limits.

This precious asset of freedom is caricatured by those who, deliberately or otherwise, promote the destruction of protective ethical standards. Indeed, freedom only really exists, in any society, when each person has the legal capacity to accept or reject, in full knowledge of the facts, what is being offered to him and not just to engage in litigation after the fact, which gives rise to many problems, as we have clearly seen in the course of these debates.

The law must be the expression of a general political vision, a social project.

Otherwise, all it can do is follow after developments that it can neither anticipate nor control.

International or supranational structures never have that extra spark of spirit which engenders motivating ideas and collective commitment.

The European Union is no exception.

Madam President, I voted for the proposal for a Council decision on the conclusion of the EU-Swiss Confederation agreements not only because I feel that it is extremely important for Switzerland, which will undoubtedly become part of the European Union in what we hope will be the near future, to have agreements established with the Member States of the Union, but also because, when I think of Switzerland, I feel a sense of relief.

Indeed, even today, all the newspapers in the European Union were proclaiming that even the fall of the European single currency, the euro, is the fault of the pensioners. Well!

So pensioners are responsible for everything that goes wrong!

In Switzerland, on the other hand, where income tax is only 10%, pensions are much higher than in our States.

Therefore, the Pensioners' Party has a liking for Switzerland.

- (FR) The report under discussion today concerns relations between Switzerland and the European Union.

Let us remember that Switzerland participated in the negotiations that led to the signing of the agreement on the European Economic Area.

In a referendum held in 1992, however, the people of Switzerland voted against this agreement, thus making it impossible for Switzerland to participate in the agreement on the EEA and with the result that Switzerland' s application for European Union membership, submitted in May 1992, was put on hold.

It was therefore necessary to find some means of maintaining links between Switzerland and the EU.

This led to the signing of bilateral agreements.

Since 1993, Switzerland has submitted a series of requests to participate in the internal market in specific sectors.

Following these requests, negotiations between Switzerland and the European Union resulted in a package of sectoral agreements.

This 'package' is made up of seven agreements on road and air transport, the free movement of persons, public procurement, research and development, mutual recognition in relation to conformity assessment, and agriculture.

In order to anticipate a situation in which any one of these agreements could be cancelled by referendum after the conclusion of the negotiations, the European Union decided to link these agreements together by including a standard clause in each of them to the effect that the agreements could only come into effect simultaneously and could only be applied in full.

This represented a minimum guarantee of coherence.

The procedure has undergone some delays in the Council due, in particular, to differences of opinion regarding the free movement of persons.

In April 2000, under pressure from the European Parliament, the Council presented the single, consolidated legislative instrument to approve the seven agreements between the Community and its Member States, on the one hand, and the Swiss Confederation, on the other.

This proposal for a decision combines the seven proposals, previously submitted by the Commission in a single legal instrument, with some amendments.

Shortly thereafter, the Council referred the matter to the European Parliament.

Only then did we have an opportunity to state our views and to decide whether or not we were going to give our assent to this package of agreements.

As it happens, our rapporteur is urging us to do so, and I shall follow his lead.

This is all the more important since a referendum on the agreement on the free movement of persons is due to be held in Switzerland on 21 May.

We must send out a positive political message by giving our assent.

I should, however, like to add a few minor points.

Switzerland must indeed clarify its position in relation to the European Union.

It must not be allowed to carry on picking and choosing the European policies it wishes to implement.

Madam President, the Pensioners' Party voted in favour of the Schierhuber report on the Convention on European Community Food Aid to the world.

We are all in agreement regarding this initiative, myself in particular, but I would like to stress the importance of avoiding the establishment of agricultural produce quotas such as milk, cereal or other food quotas resulting in these products being wasted, squashed by steam rollers in the form of citrus juicers, wine presses and so forth, whereas they could be preserved and delivered, whenever there is a need, and there is always a need, to states throughout the world which require food aid.

Madam President, this report is chiefly concerned with providing the current situation in Kosovo with the semblance of a legal basis and pseudo-democratic backing.

Parliament is invited to ratify the de facto situation created by the military attack upon Serbia and Kosovo a year ago.

After expressing at the time our opposition both to Milosevic' s ethnic cleansing and to the bombing by Western forces, we refuse to sanction in any way whatsoever the situation resulting from this bombing.

As for the financial aspects, we continue to maintain that it is the powers responsible for the bombing attacks who must fund the repairs to the damage caused by the war and its consequences, in both Kosovo and Serbia, and also in neighbouring countries, deducting the necessary sums from their military budget.

- (FR) The proposal for a regulation before us today seeks to provide an appropriate legal basis to enable the European Union to fund a number of bodies which have been set up by the international community following conflicts and which are responsible either for implementing certain peace agreements, as is the case in Bosnia-Herzegovina, or for ensuring the interim civilian administration of certain regions, as is the case, at present, in Kosovo.

The purpose of this text is also apparently to ensure the transparency of the funding, which would take the shape of subsidies, and also to make it possible to extend the type of action concerned to other bodies in future.

The text would, finally, provide the basis for the European Commission to take decisions on funding and, acting on behalf of the European Union, to then sign financial agreements with these various bodies.

Behind the sales pitch for this regulation, and as an inevitable progression from political decisions taken long ago, what we have here is no more and no less than a deliberate attempt to step up communitisation.

The present regulation, in response to a request from the Council, involves transferring the funding of joint actions, decided on within the framework of the CFSP and previously funded from the common foreign and security policy budget, to the first pillar, i.e. the vast range of Community policies managed by the Commission.

In this seemingly innocuous move we are also witness to a significant strengthening of the powers of the most integrative and most federalist body par excellence, i.e. the European Commission, on the grounds, although this is not admitted by the Council, that some operations should be perpetuated and that funds should be released for other actions.

Let us remember that if the European Commission decided to support them, any new bodies which might be set up by the international community would be guaranteed funding from the first pillar budget, without any need to even consider consulting the European Parliament.

Finally, strictly in terms of the actual budget, the proposal for a regulation puts a little more pressure on Category 4 of the financial perspective, for external measures, which is already under great strain on account of funding the reconstruction in the Western Balkans. If it were implemented this year, a supplementary and amending budget would be required.

For all the above reasons, the French Members of the Union for a Europe of Nations Group are unable to support Mr Laschet' s report.

Madam President, the Pensioners' Party, which is part of the Group of the European People' s Party, and I, myself, as its representative, voted for the Hatzidakis report on the granting of Community financial assistance in the field of Trans-European networks, mainly because communications within our Union are the single most important factor in the creation of Europe and the most important issue where the principle of subsidiarity is applied in practice.

There is no greater indication that Europe exists as a political, as well as a geographical, entity than the building of a network of links within Europe.

I hope that we will continue along this path and that national infrastructures will be established which give due consideration to European projects.

Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, I voted against Mr Sterckx' s report, which I believe constitutes a serious threat to the future of air transport.

In the first place, this report gives no precise analysis of the liberalisation of air traffic.

There is no mention of its huge impact on the environment.

There is no mention of the major implications for airspace congestion related to the fact that the average number of passengers per flight has been considerably reduced as a result of competition.

There is no mention, or only very superficial discussion, of the great decline in the social conditions observed in these sectors of activity, nor is there any mention of the adverse effects on town and country planning, to the extent that, at the present time, it costs a lot to travel to a remote area of Europe, whereas costs have fallen for routes which are already well served.

These are the negative results of liberalisation.

Worse still, Mr Sterckx' s report proposes a new phase of liberalisation, envisaging not only a single European airspace, a proposal worth considering, but associating this inevitably with the privatisation of air traffic control.

Even the United States of America has not privatised its air traffic control agency. It remains subject to the federal authority of the Federal Republic of the United States of America.

Even the home of liberalism did not go for this option.

One would have to be totally unaware of the deterioration in the safety of British transport systems, and the recurrence of accidents related to the privatisation of this means of transport, not to realise that, in terms of safety, there is nothing better than a public service.

Yet the choice made in this report is quite different, in fact the opposite, the complete antithesis.

I think that Europe is probably now, more so than before, in need of the confidence of its constituent nations, and that a new phase of liberalisation would run counter to the latter' s expectations.

They make this quite clear on a regular basis.

A subsequent return of liberalism will come as no surprise.

Madam President, on behalf of the Pensioners' Party, which is part of the Group of the European People' s Party, I voted for the Sterckx report on the regulation of the European airline industry.

I particularly welcome the recommendation in this report that national government delegations should be seconded to the European Union structures which deal with incentives for technical research.

I would also like to use these few, precious seconds allotted to me to point out that it would have been appropriate for these measures governing transport and, in particular, air transport in Europe, to make provision for young and elderly people who enjoy travelling, and that it would have been appropriate to provide flight discounts for them - but not necessarily during peak hours or on peak days - thereby promoting cultural exchanges among both young and elderly people from different States of the European Union.

. (PT) We are bound to agree with the report under discussion when it states that increasing competition has had harmful repercussions on social conditions and safety and has led to a great expansion in the number of routes, thereby causing congestion of air space.

We also support the report' s confirmation of the importance attached to passenger air transport as a public service for the remote and island regions and to the requirement that air transport safety be improved.

We are therefore bound to disagree with the fact that the report continues, despite this analysis and in a completely contradictory way, to seek greater liberalisation of every aspect of this sector, as well as the transfer of the sovereignty of air space.

These are some of the reasons why we cannot vote in favour of this report.

- (FR) I supported Mrs Fourtou' s draft report on the Commission' s Green Paper on combating counterfeiting and piracy because we are at the preparatory stage and I feel that our rapporteur has clearly outlined the serious risks involved in counterfeiting and piracy.

The fact is that, quite apart from the economic considerations, important enough in themselves, together with the activities of organised crime, consumers are being exposed to serious human health and safety risks.

I also share the views of the report when it stresses the need for public information and awareness campaigns and calls for a strengthening of the law enforcement aspect in view of the rising tide of counterfeiting and piracy.

On the other hand, I have rather more reservations as to the degree of harmonisation required, particularly in terms of criminal law.

In the same spirit, I should not like the involvement of national parliaments to be limited to a warning, inferring that we should be deadlocked if we did not take legislative powers on civil and criminal law away from the national level.

This way of reasoning, the seeds of which are to be found in the Green Paper, seems rather limited, but I have no doubts that, through cooperation between the competent authorities and the pooling of experience, it will be possible to obtain satisfactory results within optimum time limits without falling into this skewed way of thinking.

We already have tried and tested practices at national level.

What we should be doing is coordinating them better rather than ruling them out in the name of a uniformity which would only prove counter-productive.

Finally, I would like to welcome the invitation issued by our rapporteur to European and national authorities to monitor the internal use made of protected works, such as office software.

I would go even further and I believe, as my fellow Member, Mr Yves Butel, has said, that, in this area, what we need is not so much a code of conduct as for the regulations to be strictly observed.

- (FR) Computers, audio and video equipment, toys, fragrances, pharmaceutical products, clocks and watches, cars - absolutely everything is copied.

The harm suffered by the luxury goods industry is just the visible tip of the iceberg, probably also the least dangerous part.

Damage to the economy is much more significant.

A UNESCO Conference organised in Paris in June 1992 estimated the illegal gains due to counterfeiting at some BEF 3 000 billion per year.

According to the International Chamber of Commerce, the cost of counterfeiting represents between 5 and 7% of world trade.

Sales of illegal compact discs were reported to have increased by almost 20% in 1996 and comprise 14% of the world market.

In the software sector, piracy rates are estimated at 46% worldwide.

The number of jobs lost in the European Union is put at 100 000 over the past ten years.

These figures are probably still greatly underestimated, and Internet imperialism will make them higher still.

Current investigations show that piracy and counterfeiting are closely linked to other forms of organised crime, such as trafficking in drugs and armaments and money laundering.

This gives us an indication of the major stakes involved for the internal security of our Member States.

As the rapporteur quite rightly mentioned, I think that a balanced policy on the subject must combine prevention and law enforcement.

Prevention involves increasing public awareness, not just of the damage done to our firms, but also of the risks involved in purchasing poor quality products which may, in some instances, be dangerous to human health and safety.

I am thinking, for example, of pharmaceutical products and spare parts for cars.

I do not share the opinion expressed in Amendment No 8, since I think that confiscating illegally copied goods, even if it is only a simple compact disc, may well serve as an example and be of instructional value, particularly with regard to young people, who must learn that copying is damaging to the artist whose works they like.

As far as the law enforcement aspect is concerned, we must involve our Member States in a more proactive policy of fast and effective legal prosecution of offenders.

I think it would also be useful if the forces of law and order were to receive suitable training to be able to detect counterfeit goods more easily.

Increasing penalties might also have a deterrent effect.

Counterfeiting and piracy constitute a threat to the proper operation of the internal market.

They jeopardise the viability of some of our businesses, especially small- and medium-sized businesses that undertake research.

They undermine the foundations of a sound economy.

Moreover, and most especially, they mislead the consumer, sometimes at the risk of his or her health or safety.

This consumer must be protected, so much is clear.

It is in this spirit that I support Mrs Fourtou' s report.

- (FR) Mrs Fourtou' s report has given us the opportunity for a preliminary discussion on the measures to be taken to combat counterfeiting and piracy.

This report rightly deplores the harmful consequences of these methods for the economies of our countries, as well as the risks they entail for the purchasers of inferior quality products.

Parliament has therefore adopted some of the conclusions of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, particularly on what is at stake in this fight and on the importance of eliminating some of the disparities between intellectual property protection schemes in order to better address the problem.

We thought it useful to adopt, in the form of amendments, other conclusions which were not adopted by the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market, particularly regarding the need for fast, effective civil law protection for intellectual property rights, and the need for realistic, appropriate and effective legislation on patents.

Regarding the definitions of scope, it would have been better to include not only the deliberate and fraudulent sides of such activities but also the commercial motives behind them.

Not to refer to the search for easy, illegal profits, which is characteristic of activities of this type, is to omit an essential feature, one which effectively makes them similar to one aspect of organised crime.

On the other hand, I am pleased to see that the House has adopted our amendment to define innovation and the improvement of innovation in an appropriate manner, since the similarity between these two areas often makes it possible to disguise counterfeits with nothing more than superficial changes and to introduce them as innovations.

There is a great deal at stake in piracy and counterfeiting, both for the people who are the victims of the illegal copying activities and of the counterfeit products, and also for the people who make money from them.

The fact that such activities are often associated with organised crime makes it imperative for us to define most precisely the legal instruments we wish to create in order to combat it.

The effectiveness of the law, especially within the Community area, will lie in this precision and in its capacity to provide a realistic response to practical problems.

I declare the session of the European Parliament adjourned.

(The sitting was closed at 11.45 a.m.)

I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday, 4 May 2000.

- Ladies and gentlemen, as you know, on Saturday, a horrific accident struck the people of Enschede, in the Netherlands.

There was an explosion in a fireworks warehouse which has already caused at least sixteen deaths and has injured over six hundred people, six of whom are in a critical condition, with many more people reported missing.

Around four hundred homes have been destroyed by the explosion, and more than a thousand have suffered damage.

This is one of the most terrible disasters in the Netherlands since the second world war.

I have contacted the Dutch authorities to express our deepest sympathy, both in a personal capacity and on behalf of the European Parliament.

At this sad time, our thoughts go out to the victims, to their families, and also to the emergency rescue teams who are working tirelessly.

Ladies and gentlemen, I invite you to observe a minute' s silence.

(The House rose and observed a minute' s silence)

Madam President, on behalf of the 31 Dutch delegates of this European Parliament, I would like to convey to you my heartfelt thanks for the words you spoke a moment ago and for the respect this Parliament has shown for the victims of this terrible disaster in Enschede and for their relatives.

Madam President, on behalf of the 31 delegates, there is actually little I could add to your words. I would, however, like to underline how we have been moved not only by what you said a moment ago and the silence that was observed, but also by the prompt assistance across the borders to relieve the distress following this disaster.

At a moment' s notice, German colleagues joined forces with their Dutch friends to carry out the frequently dangerous activities which were necessary to control the disaster.

German hospitals too have been involved in the care of the wounded, dozens of whom are still in hospital.

I find this an example of European solidarity which is what we stand for in this Parliament.

On behalf of the 31 delegates, I would also like to thank the Commission which immediately expressed sympathy in the form of a letter from Mr Prodi to the municipality of Enschede.

I would like to ask the Commission to consider what kind of a role it sees for itself in relieving distress and in preventing terrible disasters of this kind in which so many citizens are involved.

I am extremely grateful to you on behalf of the 31 for the sympathy this Parliament has shown, and I can see in our Parliament a true representation of the European solidarity which this continent so desperately needs.

- On 7 May last year, terrorism of the most undiscriminating and brutal kind once again struck in Spain with the murder of José Luis López de Lacalle, a journalist and co-founder of the Forum d' Ermua, a peace movement of Basque intellectuals.

The terrorists intended to strike a blow at one of the most precious assets of democracy, freedom of expression.

This forum was founded after Miguel Ángel Blanco Garrido, a municipal councillor in Ermua, was murdered by ETA in July 1997. This forum means to affirm that intimidation and blackmail are not enough to silence consciences.

Throughout his life José Luis López de Lacalle fought to defend freedom and democracy.

After spending five years in prison under the Franco regime, he fell victim to another dictatorship, that of terrorism.

That very day, I made a point of staunchly condemning this act of barbarism and of expressing, both in a personal capacity and on behalf of the European Parliament as a whole, our deepest sympathy and condolences to his family and the newspaper he worked for.

I also notified the Spanish Government of our utmost support in the fight against terrorism.

The final version of the draft agenda as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting of Thursday 11 May 2000 has been distributed.

We can have five items in the Human Rights section.

At the moment, we only have four.

We therefore have the opportunity to add a further item, and I have received three requests.

A request from the GUE/NGL, the Greens and the TDI to add a new sub-item entitled "Tunisia" ; one from the PPE Group to add an item on "Spectator safety and the prevention of hooliganism at the forthcoming European football championship" ; and an item from the Union for a Europe of Nations Group to add a new sub-item entitled the "Situation of Bhutan refugees in Nepal" .

I shall therefore put these requests to the vote in the order in which I received them. Firstly, though, Mr Cohn-Bendit wishes to speak in support of the request by the GUE, the Greens and the TDI.

Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, the association agreement between the European Union and Tunisia has been in force since 1 March 1998.

Since then we have not had a single major debate on Tunisia, and there have been no topical and urgent motions.

Every time one of the groups can be relied upon to say, "Yes, it is important, but you must see that Mr Ben Ali is still just settling in."

We have all read the reports in the papers of the status of human rights and freedom of expression in Tunisia.

I find it outrageous that every time we attempt to discuss this, we are prevented by Members of Parliament and the Tunisian Government. I find it outrageous that one of the two major parties is trying once again to put off any debate or any topical and urgent motion on fundamental freedoms in Tunisia.

Our Group is therefore asking everyone to stop listening to the leaders of the two main parties, and instead to act like independently-minded adults and resolve at long last to have a debate on the situation in Tunisia.

Let us have the topical and urgent motion, and we shall see what majority there is for human rights, and what majority uses human rights purely in the interests of its own party and resorts to tactics when the situation is sensitive.

In opposition to a tactical stance on Tunisia, and in favour of frank and open debate, I urge you to vote in favour of the topical and urgent motion and to table the situation of human rights in Tunisia.

Madam President, for my part I wish to speak on a constructive rather than on a polemical basis.

I think this is indeed an opportune moment to have a debate on human rights in Tunisia. It must be held this week because today the trial of Taoufik Ben Brik' s brother is taking place in Tunis and tomorrow a delegation of Members of the European Parliament, from my Group, the Confederal Group of the European United Left/Nordic Green Left, from the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance and the Group of the Party of European Socialists will be returning from Tunis.

This week we are also due to be visited by the President of the Tunisian League of Human Rights and perhaps by Mr Taoufik Ben Brik himself.

In view of these circumstances and the importance of the European Parliament decision to take action to encourage the release of Mr Ben Brik, I think it particularly appropriate for us to enter this item on the agenda.

Madam President, firstly I would like to say that, out of self-respect, we should not create false arguments amongst ourselves.

Human rights should not only be defended when we come here, but they should be defended constantly. I believe we are all united in this fight.

There are no substantial differences between us.

It would have been a good thing if, in the past, when the Socialist Group proposed an urgent debate on the situation in Tunisia, we could have counted on the votes of those people who are protesting today, because we have not managed to have that urgency approved.

However, I would like to remind you - I was the first speaker at the last Brussels part-session and I asked you, Madam President, on behalf of all of us, to write to President Ben Ali of Tunisia - that what we have to do now is wait for the President of Tunisia to reply to you in your capacity as leader of this Parliament.

Secondly, I would like to point out that the matter of our relations with Tunisia does not end with an urgent debate.

It is a much more important and substantial issue and my Group has agreed today to present an oral question to the Commission and the Council in order that we may hold a full debate on this issue.

I believe that if Mr Cohn-Bendit, for example, wishes for a full debate on this question, he should support our proposal so that we can include it in the next agenda.

I think the House is now sufficiently well informed to proceed to the vote.

And now to the proposal from the Group of the European People' s Party on hooliganism.

Madam President, I wish to thank my own group for allowing this resolution to come this far.

It is not often that we discuss urgencies that might be able to change something for the better.

We are always very reactionary and talk about things that we really cannot affect.

However, next month, before we sit again in Strasbourg, the European football championship starts.

A number of problems have already been raised by people such as the Belgian Police Federation, and there have been many documentaries in various countries about various games and the security arrangements for Euro 2000.

I know this is meant to be a human rights issue, and indeed it is about the rights of ordinary people.

Every real supporter of football has the right to go to a football game and spectate, and then come away without a threat of violence, without problems on the streets and without being harassed unduly by people we do not particularly like to meet at any time: football hooligans.

This is what this motion is about and I very much hope Members will support it.

Madam President, on Friday of last month, the four votes could not be held because of the absence of a quorum which had been requested.

Now, I do not think that this is the appropriate place to debate this. Those who took the initiative have sent a letter to all Members to explain what exactly their intentions were in taking this action.

We will all have the chance next month, of course, to speak our minds regarding Fridays because we will then be discussing the 2001 Agenda.

However, that does mean that we have a problem in the short term, namely what we will be doing this coming Friday.

That problem has been addressed by this Parliament' s Bureau and, if I understand it correctly, the Bureau issued an opinion to the Conference of Presidents with a proposal not to hold any votes this coming Friday.

As I understand it, this has not been discussed by the Conference of Presidents.

Since it is, of course, up to this House to draft the agenda, I would like to propose simply moving all votes scheduled for Friday to Thursday because, whatever you may think of what happened last month, I think this would be the best way of avoiding the problem.

We can then decide next month what we want to do in the long term.

Thank you, Mrs van der Laan.

As you can see, this provides some incentive for you to attend in great numbers on Friday in order to vote.

I would address my very good friend, Mary Banotti, and ask what the situation is regarding Danish TV here in the Parliament building.

We are, of course, one of the small countries which are always oppressed, but we should like to be able to watch Danish television so that we can keep up with what is happening. We are Europe' s most important country.

We are simply the best. Just look at who won the Eurovision Song Contest.

But we cannot keep in touch with what is happening.

What are you going to do about it, Mary?

Madam President, this is becoming a regular item.

We were not getting interpretation throughout.

So, dear Freddy, I did not understand a word you said - but I am sure it was wonderful!

Mr Blak will explain it to you.

Madam President, I should just like to say that last year in this House we democratically rejected a motion to cancel Friday sittings by a large majority.

We decided in favour of maintaining sittings on a Friday and said that on that day we would put items on the agenda which were uncontroversial, matters which had nonetheless to be dealt with and yet could also be properly settled with a rather smaller number of people.

Last Friday, a minority of people abused a provision in the Rules of Procedure in order, as it were, to undermine the Friday sitting and to prevent the votes from taking place.

In my view, this is an abuse of a rule which, in itself, is perfectly reasonable because, after all, a majority of this House made a decision on Friday sittings last year.

The matters which were not put to the vote that Friday - including the important issue of Ethiopia - were voted on in Brussels and the results were almost unanimous.

We could have voted on them almost unanimously on the Friday too, and I should like to ask colleagues to stop this sabotage, to let us get on with our work and to discuss the issue of how we organise our work separately and calmly.

But let those who want to work here on a Friday do so in peace and quiet.

At the end of the day, the votes had to be repeated because those who had asked for there to be a check on the quorum were themselves no longer present and did not take part in the vote.

Ladies and gentlemen, as you are well aware, we are not going to start a debate on this sensitive issue.

I will allow two more speakers and then we shall move on to the order of business.

Madam President, I think there is a misunderstanding here.

Mrs Van der Laan spoke about the proposal made by the Bureau to the Conference of Presidents.

As I understand it, the Conference of Presidents has not discussed this matter any further.

According to Mrs Van der Laan, it is not the intention that we now pass judgement on an action regarding the use of the Rules of Procedure.

I would not want to term it misuse because then I would not know what else these Rules could be used for.

What matters is that we too discuss a proposal from the Bureau here and now.

Surely a proposal from the Bureau cannot simply be sidelined. All we want is that it should also be discussed and that a vote should be taken on it.

Ladies and gentlemen, I shall now give the floor to Mr Wiebenga, since he was in the chair for the Friday of the last part-session and he will be able to tell you that we have discussed this within the Bureau.

Madam President, for those Members who do not know, I would like to make it clear beforehand that I do not belong to the action group which started this Friday action, but that I was the acting President who had to contend with it.

I would like to remind you - and I am at liberty to say this here because I have also said this outside the Bureau - that I referred this point to the Bureau, to you and colleagues in the Bureau, and have, for the short term, suggested four possibilities for Fridays, before we decide on the agenda for the year 2001, because then we might just as well, of course, vote here in plenary.

The first possibility is to scrap Friday sittings altogether.

The second possibility is to have Friday sittings with a full agenda and hold votes at 12.00, at lunch times, or such like.

The third possibility is to hold debates on Fridays without voting and then delay the votes until Brussels or subsequent sittings.

The fourth possibility is to carry on as we are, that is to say, to hold minor debates on Fridays and round them off with votes.

Clearly, this last possibility will lead to situations in which other Members can request that the quorum be checked, meaning that we will once again be unable to hold votes this coming Friday.

Madam President, the competent body in these matters is not the Bureau but the Conference of Presidents.

I think that, whatever your opinion may be, whether you are for or against Fridays and whether you are for or against Strasbourg, our Parliament would benefit most if we were not to argue every Friday about the quorum and - I also told the Bureau this - if we were not to hold any votes this coming Friday.

Ladies and gentlemen, the Conference of Presidents which is to meet on Thursday will look into the situation in any case and will see what grounds there are for holding the votes on Friday.

I must also inform you that Mr Provan is to present a report to the Bureau on the internal reforms to be applied to the operation of Parliament and, of course, the organisation of the Friday sitting, which Mr Wiebenga has just been discussing, will be one of the areas under consideration.

Having said that, if you wish to continue to discuss the matter, I see no objection to this.

We shall hear your comments, presented as procedural motions.

Madam President, on a point of order.

I was simply making a protest about the electronics here.

I was unable to receive interpretation, and I am sure that certain other Members were having difficulty with interpretation earlier.

I think I was getting Swedish at one point and I could not hear Mr Blak at all.

I just wanted to point that out.

I think Mrs Banotti referred to it but as I could not hear her, because I was getting Swedish at the time, I do not really know what she said.

Thank you, Mrs Ahern, we shall take steps to ensure that this does not happen again.

Madam President, on a point of order.

It is the same point, and for once I agree with Mrs Ahern.

Madam President, I should like to start where Mrs van der Laan left off.

On the Friday of the last part-session, she announced that, from now on - for as long as there is still a sitting on a Friday - there will be a request on each occasion for a check on the quorum. This means that the group which made the request last time has itself made it plain that its only objective is destruction and not proper work.

The Bureau cannot tolerate this because the plenary has decided - Mr Posselt referred to this - that sittings should be held on a Friday, and not even the Bureau can overrule this.

We cannot allow a handful of people who, up until now, have seldom been present on a Friday, to make a mockery of us and blacken our public image.

When a roll-call vote took place at 10 o' clock, hardly any of the 30 proponents were still here.

We really cannot tolerate behaviour of this kind!

Madam President, I should like to respond to what my fellow Member has just said.

I am among those who are in favour of the Friday sitting and who think it important to keep the sitting on that day, just like on the other days of the week.

I should like to add that some of us who, quite rightly, requested that that quorum be checked so that the sittings could be conducted in due order, remained in attendance throughout the votes.

It is inaccurate, therefore, to accuse Members of sabotage.

There are Members in the Chamber who attend from Monday to Friday, and remain until the end of the sitting on Friday.

Madam President, I could not agree more with the observations made by Mr Wiebenga.

The least we can do is to carefully examine once more how we have filled Fridays.

But I would add - also because a number of misconceptions have made their way into the media - that I am not one of those people who would like to solve the 'Strasbourg' discussion via the back door, but that I do belong to the group of people who want to examine, via a vote, whether we can hold a proper sitting in Strasbourg on a Friday, which also involves our French delegates.

I wanted to highlight these two aspects.

But that also means - and I must get this off my chest - that all those Members who criticised me last time because I had levelled criticism at them, must have left the Chamber before 12.00. (The last vote was held after 12.00.)

That was very hurtful because, unfortunately, the activists, comprising pro-Europeans from my own country and a large number of anti-Europeans, had left by the time the roll-call vote was held.

Reference can be made to the last roll-call vote for this.

Let us examine in a fair manner and through sound discussion how we can fill this part-session.

Madam President, I have little to add after Mrs Oomen' s intervention.

I only hope that you will understand this.

The Dutch group which made Fridays a subject for discussion in this way did not do this because they are against Strasbourg or anything like that.

They did so because time and again, there is heavy criticism, also in the Netherlands, regarding these Friday sittings and also because most of us prefer to work in our country on Fridays.

This is because we already spend a great deal of our time in Brussels and Strasbourg as it is, and because we need the time to talk to our electorate.

I think that a serious discussion about Fridays is urgently needed and this should not be confused with the discussion about Strasbourg.

It is a discussion on the question of whether we organise our work efficiently and well and whether we have any time left to spend in our own constituencies.

I support the action in this sense.

As I said, there is scope for discussing this when we come to examine Mr Provan' s report.

Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, I was among those who were present throughout Friday.

It is easy to check up on, because electronic voting took place that day.

In fact, there is no question of sabotage. Rather, it is a question of taking Parliament seriously enough to find it actually embarrassing that there are only 70 Members here when we vote on important matters such as school milk or Ethiopia.

This has also given rise to quite a major debate in my own country, Sweden.

We must get a serious discussion under way about these matters.

Either we make Friday a proper working day or we do away with it.

I will be very brief, Madam President. Moreover, I feel that this issue should be discussed in more detail, perhaps at a more convenient time.

I subscribe to the view that Parliament should work on Fridays. Solutions can, in all probability, be found by putting debates rather than voting sessions on the agenda, for we are all aware that Fridays are convenient for interaction with the Commission and, therefore, important in terms of our political work in the area of our function as MEPs representing our home territories.

When we discuss this issue, it would, however, be preferable for Members to refrain, when considering the action to be taken, from laying themselves open to misrepresentative publicity regarding the nature of Parliament' s function.

There are certain types of action which give our countries and our electorate the impression that, in actual fact, the European Parliament spends its time fooling around and doing no work. The effect of these actions is therefore damaging, whatever the motive behind them.

I therefore hope that we will be responsible enough to reach a point at which the debate can brought to a definitive conclusion without going down a path which none of us want to take and without laying ourselves open to criticism.

As Mr Wiebenga said, and as I said myself, we are currently investigating the best solutions.

Madam President, all I asked for is whether or not it is possible to put the request that we do not vote this coming Friday to the vote. After all, this is now the item on the agenda: determining the agenda for this plenary session.

No, Mrs van der Laan, you ought to know that according to the Rules of Procedure, this is a request that should have been presented in due form and at the due time, and this was not the case.

I cannot therefore put this request to the vote.

It only remains for me to express the hope that there will be a good attendance this Friday, votes or not.

I am counting on you all, if only for the benefit of the public that attends our debates.

The next item is the report (A5-0115/2000) by Mrs Jeggle, on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development, on the Commission proposals relating to the prices for agricultural products (COM(2000) 77 - C5-0121/2000 to C5-0126/2000 - 2000/0045(CNS) to 2000/0050 (CNS)).

Madam President, a large contingent within the Committee on Budgets is of the opinion that, as far as next year' s agricultural prices are concerned, we should adhere to what was agreed in Berlin.

This is an achievement in itself in certain sectors of agriculture.

In various European countries, large groups of farmers are in dire straits.

At present, there is a great deal of suffering in silence.

So far, it would seem that the agricultural budget was born under a lucky star.

The euro-dollar rate impacts favourably on the budget, although certain figures are a cause of concern.

There is nothing to say, however, that things will remain the same forever.

Despite this, the Commission has made various proposals to benefit from the agricultural budget, if possible.

Sometimes, these discussions focus on the sugar sector and other times they home in on other sectors of the agricultural budget.

The Committee on Budgets is of the opinion that we must keep to what was agreed in the plenary a number of months ago, namely a situation in which the agricultural budget serves as a primary source of funding for external EU action should never arise.

The budget will stick to this principle.

Secondly, according to the Committee on Budgets, the European Commission should come up with proposals to reform the sugar sector without delay.

If we start to discuss the budget for 2001 in structural terms in September or October of this year, then it is essential to know what the Commission has in mind for the sugar sector.

Am I not right in thinking that sugar fell outside the scope of the Berlin agreements?

And in order to evaluate the 2001 budget effectively, we need to know this.

I hope that Commissioner Fischler will be able to tell us this afternoon when he intends to produce reform proposals for sugar.

Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, there is no longer much point in discussing the package of agricultural prices since the 1992 CAP stipulated the gradual transition from a production price support system to a direct aid system, increasingly required to be dissociated from the production volumes.

And as Agenda 2000 adopted and extended this approach, the establishment of agricultural prices is henceforth multiannual.

While, however, it must still be possible to make annual adjustments, they must nonetheless comply, for the most part, with the commitments made in Berlin covering this period.

This leads me, together with my colleagues on the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development, to refuse to endorse the Commission' s proposal to reduce the monthly increments for cereals in two phases, by 7.5% each time.

The same applies to moisture content in cereals.

The Berlin agreement must continue to be our benchmark.

This is the principled position that the European Union adopted in Seattle with regard to its trading partners and competitors within the World Trade Organisation.

Logically, then, it should also set the standard in our debates on internal CAP matters.

In particular, the European Union must fulfil its commitments in order to enable European farmers to have a clear idea of the policy as it affects them, in order to be able to manage their farms as wisely as possible.

I therefore think it imperative to lift the veil from this notion of making the agricultural sector pay for Kosovo.

In this connection, then, I would urge the Commission to provide us very quickly with its proposed reform of the COM in sugar.

Mr President, the opinion of the Committee on Budgets and that of the Liberal Group more or less coincide.

I will therefore not repeat what I said in the first two minutes.

All these points which I mentioned are also backed by the Liberal Group.

I would like to add a few more points, however.

We are living in an era in which the agricultural budget is extremely tight.

The slightest movement in the dollar and euro rates would get us into great difficulty. This being the case, the Commission will have to make a choice as to what to do with the money that is available.

Potentially, however, there is another very large gap.

Over the past few years, we have been faced with outbreaks of epidemics of infectious animal diseases.

We had the BSE crisis in Europe and several European countries suffered from swine fever outbreaks.

These combined outbreaks have cost the European budget billions.

It has so far been possible to finance them from categories other than the agricultural budget.

It was agreed in Berlin that this can no longer be the case.

If I am not mistaken, the agricultural budget only comprises one item of approximately EUR 100 million for the control of animal diseases.

This is peanuts compared to what was needed in the past to control outbreaks of infectious diseases.

This is why the Liberal Group is expressly asking the Commission to produce proposals as soon as possible for coping with any disasters.

One of the options is possibly to set up an insurance system throughout Europe, which would also promote fair competition.

In anticipation of the budgetary discussions in September, we would like the Commission to provide us with the necessary data so that we can take this into consideration in the discussions of the budgets for the year 2001.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, adoption of the 2000/2001 agricultural price package involves a commitment to save EUR 300 million from the agriculture budget and to use the appropriations released for reconstruction work in Kosovo.

In this context the report rightly points out that the Commission ought to submit a general document on this to Parliament, in the form of a concrete plan, before further austerity proposals can be accepted.

Without a doubt, the issue of funding the whole reform package plays a decisive role.

What I do not find satisfactory in this process, however, is the fact that we always speak first of reducing expenditure and revenue while at the same time transferring ever more tasks to the Commission, which, of course, does not reduce costs either.

Up until 2006 the Commission should work on the basis of the realistic targets set and should deduce its financial needs from them.

As a result of Agenda 2000, European farmers had to accept a EUR 5 billion reduction in their income.

This meant that the agriculture budget was fixed at EUR 50.5 billion and it should stay as such.

To achieve its objectives, the Commission should, in my view, be invited to present a report showing how costs have changed in the agricultural sector.

Today, more deals are concluded in a second than used to be in an entire day and change is the only constant.

In the EU in 1999, the prices of crop products fell by 4% and livestock products by 6%.

As a result of excessive over-production, pig prices fell by 9%.

All the important agricultural products such as milk, beef, cereals and pork are suffering from increased turbulence on the world' s foreign exchanges, reducing farmers' incomes still further.

That is why we are still far from answering the question of how European Union farmers should make a living in the future.

In the saturated marketplace, only products produced economically can be sold.

The price reductions will destroy farmers' livelihoods in Europe and thus temporarily ease the pressure on the market.

Following this structural change the agricultural holdings which have been able to survive will further increase their output and wield even greater power on the world market.

Another price war will lead to a new round of market redistribution.

Further developments will show whether the reform of the EU' s agricultural policy by means of Agenda 2000 is capable of achieving its overall aims or not.

Mr President, notwithstanding the fact that Agenda 2000 has set the parameters governing agriculture for the period up to 2006, the annual price package is still very important.

I agree fully with those who expressed their reservations today in relation to the Commission proposals on the cereals sector.

I am very pleased to see Commissioner Fischler here to listen to this debate.

To farmers the price received in the marketplace should represent the real value of their professional endeavours, rather than what they often perceive as social support for the products of their labour.

While not in any way wishing to detract from the overall success of CAP reform, as agreed in Agenda 2000, and acknowledging that without income support farmers would not survive, I must, at the same time, confess to some unease about a situation in which the produce of the land, as produced by our farmers, has to be sold at below production costs.

In this context the support for agriculture - it is substantial and I acknowledge that because it represents almost 50% of the entire budget - must be seen also as a subsidy to consumers.

With the availability of employment outside agriculture and the advances made by the EU and Member States in reducing unemployment, there is now a serious threat to the sustainability of Europe's traditional family farm.

In recent weeks we have heard much talk about a review of the agricultural budget which was agreed in Berlin only a few months ago.

I get the feeling that those concerned only with book-keeping have absolutely no understanding of what is happening out there in the real world.

I warn that unless we become more vigilant and show a greater understanding of the unique and irreplaceable role of farmers in society, future generations and parliamentarians will be forced to react to save agriculture.

That is what we are now doing in our attempt to rectify the rural-urban imbalance which we have allowed to develop over a period of years.

Remember: that it was not the people who created this major problem for society; it was a lack of vision on the part of politicians and planners.

Let us take a fresh look at how better we can plan the long-term survival of agriculture as the profession responsible for food security and safety, taking account of the unique role of farmers as managers of the environment.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I would firstly like to congratulate Mrs Jeggle on the report that she has produced, on the work she has done and on having achieved the practically unanimous support of the Committee on Agriculture for her report.

I would also like to congratulate the Commission on having included a multiannual element in the proposals.

Nevertheless, although this is a little repetitive, I would like you to bear in mind and reconsider, with regard to cereals, both moisture content and the monthly price reviews, since they are issues which could cause us considerable harm.

There is also another question, and I feel that harsh words are required: every time a problem arises in this European Union or in its political positions - positions which I do not question - we consider taking funds away from the agricultural budget.

This issue is of serious concern to us, since the Commissioner for Budgets has repeated that she intends to take EUR 300 million away from sugar to send to Kosovo.

There are also other matters which I would like to stress, which do not appear in the proposal on prices, such as my concern for the nut sector, hazelnuts and almonds, which is facing such great problems at the moment, since, in some cases, the improvement plans implemented by the Commission are coming to an end.

Since its review is not finished, and until the problem of the nut industry is resolved, an extension of these improvement plans should be reconsidered, until its correct place is found, which should be the COM in fruits, where it will be treated in a genuinely differentiated fashion.

Other issues of concern to me do not appear, such as the case of asparagus intended for processing.

Article 10(3) of the Regulation on processed fruits and vegetables provides for lump sum aid.

This aid is going to stop very soon; it comes to an end during this season.

How does the Commission intend to ensure that, in Europe, this aid is used to promote competitiveness and continues to be given to asparagus producers?

With regard to table grapes, on 31 July aid expires for the production of juice, which is included in the COM in wine.

In my opinion, it should be included in the next amendment of the COM in fruits.

Once it has expired however, that is, from 31 July, what are we going to do, until the new reforms are approved, about the aid for table grape processing?

Regulation No 2275 also provides for aid for promotion in the flower and plant sector, and this aid is also coming to an end.

How can this happen, given that the Council has asked the Commission to carry out a study on the evolution of the aid, in order to justify whether or not it should continue?

I believe that, while waiting for this study to be presented - and we still know nothing about it - and then for a reform to be proposed, Regulation No 2275 should perhaps be extended.

Does this fit in with the Commission' s plans?

They are important sectors because they affect very specific areas.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, Agenda 2000 has created a certain kind of stability for the European Agricultural Policy.

I consider it a matter of great importance that we can have a clear and firm view of the future, at least until 2006.

The departure from the Berlin Agreement - these sums are significant to agriculture, but extremely small on the level of the Community as a whole - the question in principle of departing from what has been agreed, is a very serious matter.

It is necessary for this Parliament to make decisions on a new and ongoing agricultural policy after 2006.

This kind of policy, which departs from what has been agreed upon, is not likely to create the stability and spirit that would enable us to share a common view of the future.

One thing of which we seem oblivious, is the present everyday reality of agriculture.

There has been a considerable rise in agricultural costs; fuel prices have gone up, and the level of costs in general is showing a constant upward trend.

In addition to this, farmers as well as the food industry have invested a great deal in quality, in order to rid us of the scandals which have marred the European agricultural model.

It is the farmers themselves who will ultimately have to pay these costs.

The farmers for their part have carried out all their duties and obligations.

We may only hope that the other party will also hold to those mutual agreements that have been made.

Mr President, in its proposals to the Council of Ministers, the Commission has not set out the prices of products and subsidies, as it falsely claims it has done; in our opinion, it simply wants to remind us of the prices and subsidies which will be in force for the period from 2000-2001 in accordance with existing regulations, and at the very most, to amend some monthly increments to the intervention prices of any products to which this system still applies.

We should like to take this opportunity, however, to note that first: producer prices and subsidies have been frozen for numerous agricultural products for twelve consecutive years, as is the case with sheepmeat and goatmeat, whereas for other products they have been falling due to the constant increase in production costs, thereby reducing net agricultural incomes, as the Eurostat figures also show.

The question therefore is: what are the farmers doing about this?

Secondly, eroding or even abolishing the intervention system will leave farmers at the mercy of traders, who buy from producers at derisory prices and then often resell at substantially higher prices.

As a result, while nominal producer prices have fallen, often quite sharply, consumer prices have risen.

In other words, both producers and consumers are being bled dry in the name of protection, which is what the European Union claims it is doing.

The question is what will farmers and consumers do about this? Will they step up their fight?

Thirdly, low quotas and the resultant extortionate fines are eating up the subsidies for the 1999 harvest.

Thus the subsidies end up becoming a white elephant.

A blatant example is that of oil, which also concerns my country, and in particular my native island of Lesbos.

Despite declarations that the 1998-1999 subsidy would be GRD 460, producers were only paid GRD 330, one year later.

The same applies to cotton where, although the minimum price is EUR 101 per 100 kilos, Greek producers will be paid less than EUR 65 because of the co-responsibility levy.

We have the following comments to make on the issues addressed in the report: as regards cereals, we disagree with the reduction in the monthly increments of the intervention price, which should have been increased.

Also, it must be said that this approach is further eroding the intervention system and, as with other products, it will apparently be abolished altogether for cereals.

We also disagree with the monthly increment being paid in November, since harvest time in Greece is in June.

And similarly with rice, we recommend that intervention commence on 1 October or November and not on 1 April because otherwise, our producers are at the mercy of greedy profiteering traders for six months....

(The President cut the speaker off)

Mr President, Commissioner, I should like to support Mrs Jeggle' s report and the statements she has made by asking a few very simple questions.

Commissioner, I think it is in your interest to use the support offered by the Members of the European Parliament in order to attempt to safeguard your budget for agriculture.

When we see the way in which money is being used and diverted to finance other measures, we have good cause to wonder if we shall still have the resources to implement a European agricultural policy after enlargement, and moreover to ensure rural development.

When you achieve savings on cereals through moisture rates, how many millions does that amount to throughout Europe?

And how are these millions going to be used?

Do not forget that it is the intermediate regions that will be the first to suffer the effects, not the good cereal-growing areas, the main cereal-growing areas, but rather the regions where there are average production levels, where many farmers are currently experiencing problems.

Looking across the board at agricultural regions, I am forced to note that it is these small- and medium-sized farms whose continuity is not assured, where the farmers' children are looking for careers outside agriculture.

I therefore think that this policy calls for caution, Commissioner.

The agricultural budget must be used to promote rural development and to step up support to the family-type farms that exist at grass-roots level, rather than containing only budget measures whose sole purpose is to make savings.

Commissioner, we are counting on you a great deal.

We are speaking from the bottom of our hearts. Within Parliament we are aiming to defend the family farm.

- (PT) Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I would first like to congratulate our rapporteur, Mrs Jeggle, on her work, and say that, in fact, this price package is no longer as important as it has been in the past, since, fortunately, it has started to turn into the presentation and definition of agricultural policy in the medium term.

This is why, only recently, we carried out a reform of Agenda 2000: these price packages tend merely to make annual adjustments in response to one-off situations.

The current price package comes at a time when the Commission has promised to present proposals for reform in various sectors over the current year, specifically the rice, sugar, fruit, vegetable and oil sectors. I hope that these reforms do take place.

There is one particular situation that I would like to highlight, which concerns the issue of fruit and vegetables and which is of particular importance to my country.

We are all aware of the iniquity of the present regulations of the policy on processed tomatoes.

Changes to quotas are made between Member States, and this happens every year within a framework which does not take account of unforeseen changes in the climate or the market, and this creates a permanent state of instability in the sector.

A short while ago, therefore, following Mrs González' report, the European Parliament approved the urgent establishment of guarantee thresholds at Member State level and the Commission was asked to present these proposals as a matter of urgency.

However, in the price package, the Commission has not presented anything in this regard to remedy the situation, and the Commission does not appear to be in any hurry to put forward a proposal either.

My country is likely to lose 10% of its quota if the COM proposal is not adopted quickly, and this, quite frankly, is unacceptable.

So the question is, why has the Portuguese Presidency not adopted initiatives to ensure that a proposal would be put forward with due haste?

And why do they use the argument that "the tomato industry cannot be reformed because there is no money" when we spend the money we have on things other than agriculture, such as the financing provided for Kosovo?

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, first of all I should like to thank you, Mrs Jeggle, very much for your report.

After all, it is the first which you have tabled in the House.

I should also like very much to thank the Members of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and the other committees, which have actively participated in the consultations, for their constructive cooperation.

I am pleased that Parliament agrees with the main thrust of the Commission's proposals, namely that we need more continuity and that prices therefore need to be fixed on a multiannual basis.

With your permission, I will first comment on the background to, and the content of, the proposals which we have made.

It is absolutely right - as has been stated here - that the price package is no longer as significant as it was in the past.

As a logical consequence of the multiannual approach which we chose for Agenda 2000, the Commission has now also proposed to set the institutional prices and amounts for those sectors for which this is actually still necessary for an unlimited period of time.

This offers our farmers a considerably more stable framework for their longer-term planning, although we do not, in principle, rule out making any changes which may later prove to be necessary.

The only exception to this multiannual approach in our proposals concerns the sugar sector, where the production quota regime currently in force - as most of you here probably know - will expire in the 2000/2001 financial year.

That is why it would not have been appropriate - given that this final year has to be fixed now first - to introduce a change here.

That is why we are also proposing that the current prices for sugar be kept for this final year of the production quota regime now in force.

I shall now turn to the individual amendments put forward.

Amendment No 4 seeks to leave the monthly increments unchanged.

I cannot, to be quite frank, agree to this proposal, because you are wrong to claim that the reduction which we have proposed contravenes the decisions made in Berlin.

On the contrary, this is the logical consequence of the decisions made in Berlin!

You see, in Berlin it was decided to maintain the system of monthly increments. But that has nothing to do with adjustments to the amounts.

In the past, too, we made adjustments- more or less - every year.

On the other hand, I should also like, as it were, to warn you against believing that it would not be sensible to make this adjustment, because you have to bear one thing in mind: if the amounts are not adjusted and this leads to market supply being disrupted and to cereals being held back in the hope of higher carryovers, then farmers will lose more in the spring when they market their products than they would gain through these higher monthly increments.

That is why I cannot accept this proposal.

The second issue, which involves updating and tightening up the quality criteria, has, of course, been under discussion for months now.

In the meantime, since we are, after all, dealing here with an area where the Commission has exclusive competence - I should also like to emphasise this - a vote has been held in the relevant Management Committee.

That actually puts an end to the debate because, as of 19 April, Commission Regulation (EC) No 824/2000 was enacted.

I do not think that we should reopen this debate now.

That is why I cannot agree to Amendments Nos 2 or 5.

Since the issue of moisture content has been raised here today, I should like to point out that the price of cereals might have been fixed in Berlin, but not the price of water! 14.5% is the maximum moisture content which traders customarily accept nowadays.

It does not present a particular problem to farmers. After all, if a farmer does have bad luck and has rather higher moisture levels in his cereal crop, then all he needs to do is to pay the drying costs and the problem is solved!

But we can no longer accept the idea of having grain in intervention storage which does not comply with usual international trade practices.

Unfortunately, I also have a problem with including mustard seed in the support system, as you propose in Amendments Nos 1 and 3, because that would be contrary to the Marrakech Agreement.

It would run counter to the peace clause which states that no new products may be incorporated into the support system.

I now come to Amendments Nos 6 and 7.

Some clarification is probably called for here.

Firstly, the funding of foreign policy measures for the 2000/2001 financial year, which is what we are discussing here, is not in any way linked to the setting of sugar prices.

Secondly, the proposed reduction in the ceiling under heading 1a for the year 2002 does not prejudice the measures in any particular production sector either.

Thirdly, Mrs Jeggle also addressed the situation in 2003 and subsequent years. Here, the Commission has decided that appropriations are only to be withdrawn once the political situation in Serbia has changed dramatically.

If this is the case, the Commission will decide when it reviews the financial perspective in 2002 - as it decided to do in Berlin - how to meet any possible needs.

At this stage, the Commission has specifically decided not to prejudice anything here either.

In addition, the Commission has decided that, as a general rule, funds can only be taken from heading 1a if sufficient funds are not available from other sources, and at the moment it is far from certain that this will be the case.

Mrs Jeggle, you proposed that we should at least utilise the appropriations in 1b - i.e. those for rural development - and you linked this to the disastrous storms in Badem-Württemberg in which many trees were uprooted by the strong winds.

This is a much more complex problem because here the Commission had originally intended to make it possible precisely to transfer funds between the two sub-headings.

However, this was rejected by Parliament.

That is why a transfer of this kind is not possible on the basis of the Financial Regulation currently in force and the Interinstitutional Agreement.

I now come to the question which Mrs Keppelhoff asked concerning what ECOFIN actually did decide. Well, the proposals which Mrs Schreyer circulated to ECOFIN were rejected for the time being.

At the moment, however, we are, of course, still in the discussion phase; the actual budget debate on the 2001 budget is yet to take place.

The rejection does not primarily or exclusively concern this issue of the 300 million; the proposals as a whole were given a negative reception by ECOFIN.

Amendment No 8, to which Mr Mulder, in particular, referred, concerns a study on alternative ways of covering financial losses arising in the event of outbreaks of animal diseases.

The study which Mr Mulder mentioned was also intended to examine the possibility of introducing a compulsory insurance scheme.

We will commission a study of this kind.

However, I have to tell you that the results will not be available until the end of the year.

We will not obtain the results from those carrying out the study any earlier than that.

I also share the view expressed in the amendment that producers ought to take on more of the financial responsibility for eradicating animal diseases.

However, in principle, it is the Member States who are responsible for this issue.

That is why initially all we can do here is carry out an evaluation of the possible ways in which we at Community level might support the Member States in setting up schemes of this kind.

In any case, this issue ought to be dealt with in the context of the review of veterinary legislation which is currently being carried out by the Directorate-General responsible for public and animal health.

Mrs Redondo asked a number of questions about the organisation of the market in fruit and vegetables, about nuts and about ornamental plants, and Mr Cunha asked about processed tomatoes.

As planned, the Commission will submit a report on the functioning of the organisation of the market in fruit and vegetables before the end of this year.

This report will not only cover fresh fruit and vegetables but also processed fruit and vegetables, and therefore processed tomatoes.

We expect this report to be ready at the beginning of the second half of this year.

As far as promoting ornamental plants is concerned - or to be more precise, Mrs Redondo, publicity for the ornamental plants sector - it is true that the Commission is carrying out a review here.

In fact, we made this a requirement when the legal arrangements were introduced and, depending on the outcome of the assessment, we will table a proposal in sufficient time to ensure that there is no interruption in the publicity campaign.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon.

The next item is the report (A5-0124/2000) by Mrs Schierhuber, on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development, on the proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulation (EC) No 1251/1999 establishing a support system for producers of certain arable crops to include flax and hemp grown for fibre [COM(1999) 576 - C5-0280/1999 - 1999/0236(CNS)] and on the proposal for a Council regulation on the common organisation of the market in flax and hemp grown for fibre [COM(1999) 576 - C5-0281/1999 - 1999/0237(CNS)].

Mr President, according to Mrs Schierhuber' s present report, if something goes wrong with a certain regulation in Europe, in this case flax, it is quite possible to ensure that that regulation can remain intact by means of new proposals.

Flax, like hemp, is a special product, with a long European tradition.

The mere fact that both my trousers and jacket are made of linen and flax which is processed in Flanders and partly in Zeeland, and grown in France, bears out this product' s long-standing tradition.

The reason we are having to hold this debate is to do with the fact that the regulation has gone off the rails.

We all know what happened to short flax.

We also know that that derailment occurred in Southern Europe and we need to be prepared to adapt the policy.

But what is now happening with the Commission' s proposal is tantamount to throwing out the baby with the bathwater.

At the same time, it is quite possible to tighten the flax and hemp regulations so that we can manage on a normal budget such as the one we have had over the past couple of years and, despite this, continue to grow flax and hemp in Europe at a profit.

I am saying this because, although the cultivation of flax and hemp is traditional, they are also used in special applications in linen for clothing and in other applications in the non-food sector. I am thinking of dashboards and bumpers for cars.

At the same time, they form a true complement to agricultural policy. They are special products which offer a great deal of added value and employment.

It is exactly because of these three facets that we have to be so much more careful about drafting a sound regulation.

This is why I give my full backing to Mrs Schierhuber' s report.

The amounts which have been mentioned guarantee that cultivation remains profitable and also ensure sound processing.

What we need is tighter control on processing to ensure that malpractices are prevented in future.

I would like to end on a historical note.

My country suffered an eighty-year war at the hands of Spain, which was eventually settled with the Peace of Münster.

The people who met round the table came from the southern Netherlands - Belgium as it is known today, - the northern Netherlands - the Netherlands as we know it today - and Spain, and all three wore linen jackets, most probably made in Flanders, the linen being grown in Northern France and Belgium.

An eighty-year conflict failed to destroy the cultivation of flax along the North Sea coast.

Surely, we cannot afford to let the current regulation go under on account of a minor derailment in Spain which has meanwhile been rectified and which has led to crops being cultivated there over an area reduced to 50 000 hectares.

I would like a new flax regulation for Europe to reflect this historical awareness that was achieved with the Peace of Münster.

Mr President, we agree with the objectives pursued in the Commission' s proposal on the new regulation on flax and hemp: to regulate and balance the markets, simplify the common agricultural policy and prevent fraud.

However, we do not agree with the chosen method.

This is because we consider that this proposal, since the amendments improving it, which were presented by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development, have not been accepted, may lead to the total disappearance of hemp and flax crops in small- and medium-sized holdings, and as an alternative crop in certain areas of the Union.

We believe, Commissioner, that it is unacceptable that, in order to put an end to fraud, we should seek to end cultivation within a certain sector.

This is a good time to point out that the best way to combat fraud is through the total transparency of public aid and of the investigations into fraud that are under way, and publishing the names of fraudsters, as the only way of preventing all farmers and the whole of the sector from having to pay for the consequences of fraud on the part of a few speculators.

The inclusion of flax and hemp within the general regulations on herbaceous plants requires the establishment of a single yield for all areas of the European Union.

The existence of different yields in northern and southern areas, in the different regions of the Union, may lead to real discrimination in payments per surface area with regard to this crop.

Therefore, we request that the inclusion of an average yield be accepted for all regions of the Union, and that this be the average yield for cereals.

With regard to aid for processing, we feel that it is completely inappropriate that there should be transitional aid for the processing of short-fibre flax, as the Commission proposes, which would end in 2006.

We believe that it should be long-term aid and that it should be brought into line with the aid for the processing of long-fibre flax, which is the only way of guaranteeing the commercial production of short-fibre flax in an industrial sector which provides a genuine alternative to synthetic products.

Commissioner, we are in complete agreement on the need for stabilisers with regard to this crop, but we completely disagree with the national guaranteed quantities established in the Commission' s proposal, since we feel that they are absolutely inadequate and represent quite the opposite of the actual situation in each of the countries.

We therefore also ask you to consider the proposal presented by the Committee on Agriculture.

Lastly, we absolutely agree with the existence of controls in this sector.

Therefore, the existence, in every single case, of the sales contract between the farmer and the processor, seems to us to be essential.

We are therefore voting against the report with regard to the disappearance of these contracts.

The existence of a contract is the best way of proving that the crop has been sold and processed.

Mr President, Commissioner, I should like to thank the rapporteur, Mrs Schierhuber, for this report, not least because it takes into consideration processing in those countries in particular, which, as Members of the EU, have also taken up the cultivation of flax.

It is quite natural that they have considered the market and consequently also the support for and emphasis on processing to be matters of paramount importance, particularly in the case of short-fibre flax, which can be used for buildings and as insulation.

I would also like to say I agree with the previous speaker, Mrs Rodríguez Ramos, regarding average yields.

The average yields of flax and hemp are very similar across Europe, in the North as well as the South.

There are no great differences between them.

As far as cereals are concerned, however, the differences are considerable.

Such being the case, it would be unreasonable if the fringe areas - i.e. the areas around the Mediterranean and the North - were to be placed in an unequal position with regard to aid payable on the basis of area in the case of hemp and flax, which represents such small-scale production in the context of agricultural production as a whole.

Amendment No 38 is therefore particularly sensible; I endorse it and hope that it will receive wide support, expressly in order to prevent the Mediterranean and Nordic countries from being placed in a position of disadvantage in comparison with the central regions of the European Union, as far as this area of production is concerned.

Mr President, I am pleased to have this opportunity to address Parliament on this very important issue.

The main thing to stress is that misuse of funds in one place should not prevent innovation continuing in other areas.

Excellent schemes are already being developed and should be supported.

In an unstable agricultural industry, the opportunities offered by flax and hemp in a developing market for natural fibres should not be lost.

It will provide farmers with the opportunity to diversify - something that they have continually been urged to do by respective Member State governments and by the European Parliament - to produce new employment possibilities.

In my own nation, Wales, flax processing plants are already being established using European Union aid.

The report from our Agricultural Committee also includes amendments to extend grant aid for producing flax and hemp to non-arable land, thus providing opportunities to diversify areas of the European Union unable to obtain monetary support under the present regime.

This is a crucial matter as it affects thousands of hectares of European land with low productive possibilities.

For example, 80% of the land mass of my nation, Wales, is non-arable.

The higher than average incidence of rainfall there makes it ideal terrain for growing short-fibre flax and yet it could not apply for European Union support under prior regulations.

Its peripheral location, something which has already been stressed here from other areas, and its small family farm units having to compete in a wider market, coupled with the high value of sterling, has meant that it has lost 80% of its income in less than three years.

The importance of flax production being subsidised in such areas of the European Union cannot be overemphasised.

I would like to thank the rapporteur for accepting our amendments in this regard.

We also reject quotas and a ceiling for this production, as this would limit the possibilities to develop diversification and employment possibilities in disadvantaged regions.

We also believe there should be a balance of support between farmers and processors.

The rapporteur, Mrs Schierhuber, has agreed to put a limit of EUR 600 per hectare to farmers directly, provided that the farmer proves to the competent authorities, within 18 months after having applied for the subsidy, that he has delivered the fibre to a processor.

We also agreed if this proof could not be provided to the competent authorities within that period, the subsidy should stay at the level of the premia for set-aside land.

I congratulate the rapporteur and call on the European Parliament to support the Agriculture Committee's report.

Mr President, first and foremost I would like to thank Mrs Schierhuber for the work she has done, the main merit of which is the fact that it introduces some sensible elements into a proposal which makes no sense whatsoever.

It is true that the regulation in force is deficient in terms of control, and some people have taken advantage of these deficiencies in order to obtain aid which stretches the bounds of legality.

These situations obviously required modifications which logically should have concentrated on strengthening controls.

Nevertheless, we have seen another example of the unique way in which the Commission fulfils its function of producing legislative proposals.

The Commission' s proposal takes an extraordinary approach: instead of strengthening the control mechanisms, it abolishes aid for short-fibre flax.

To be honest, the Commission is behaving here like the doctor who proposes decapitation as a cure for a headache.

Furthermore, the Commission' s proposal, if put into practice, would lead to the disappearance of the crop in some Member States, which would have a negative affect on many farmers who had found an alternative crop which did not produce surpluses and which was destined for non-food use.

In Spain, for example, practically all flax grown is short-fibre flax, since the heat and the lack of rainfall restrict the growth of the plant.

Furthermore, the dryness of the ground in summer makes it practically impossible to pull up the plant together with its roots in order to obtain long fibre.

Furthermore, short-fibre flax is perfectly suited to dry conditions, there is a certain market for it and, at least in theory, it is the type of production which we are intending to promote.

The elimination of aid for short-fibre flax would hinder the innovative non-food use of agricultural products, fundamentally affecting regions with low rainfall and more difficult conditions.

The Commission is therefore proposing to concentrate aid in the areas with the best conditions and deny it to the least-favoured ones.

I would like to remind the Commission of Article 158 (ex Article 130A) of the Treaty, which lays down that social and economic cohesion must be strengthened, and the differences in levels of development between the different regions and the underdevelopment of the least-favoured regions, including the rural areas, should be reduced.

Lastly, I think it is essential that the Commission' s proposals are not accepted; however, in any event, the inclusion in the regulations on herbaceous crops would lead to unfair situations as a result of the use of yields conditioned by drought.

Mrs Rodríguez Ramos' amendments therefore seem to me to be a good solution to the problem.

Mr President, over the past couple of years, we have seen a sharp increase in the acreage of fibre flax and hemp as a result of subsidy-hunting in Member States such as Great Britain and Spain.

Producers in those countries destroyed their harvest, whilst they pocketed the subsidies for the crops.

It is only right that the Council clamped down on this type of misuse of Community funding by amending the flax regulation.

The original objective of production support was to bolster the traditional fibre flax crops which are mainly grown in Belgium, France and the Netherlands.

It is vital not to lose sight of this objective.

We therefore reject the proposal that the Committee on Budgets outlined in its opinion, namely to pitch the support granted to short- and long-fibre flax at the same level.

The production costs for long-fibre flax are higher than those for short-fibre flax and for hemp.

It is precisely with the short-fibre variant that farmers fiddled the system.

We can go along with the proposal to bring the cultivation of flax under the general support regulation for arable crops.

But the cereal support level is too low for long-fibre flax and therefore acts as a disincentive to producers to grow this flax variant.

This is why we have made our approval of this report dependent upon whether the support level for producers of long-fibre flax will be double that for cereal.

As long as support for processors continues to be varied according to whether the crop concerned is short- or long-fibre, we can do away with this differentiation in the support for producers.

An increase in support should, however, be accompanied by the following three control measures.

Firstly, a compulsory contract with processors who, in turn, must prove that the flax has been processed.

Secondly, a certain quota per Member State, shared between long-fibre and short-fibre flax and hemp.

Thirdly, the use of certified seed.

Finally, I would point out that, as it is late in the season, this regulation will not be able to come into force until the 2000-2001 season.

Mr President, Commissioner, we are discussing a Commission proposal on the reform of the COM on flax and hemp in two respects.

Firstly, the Commission is explaining the need for the reform in terms of an increase in budgetary cost.

I do not believe that that is the best way to try to justify the need for a reform, although I agree that it is needed.

Amongst the objectives which this reform should have, as well as simplifying and updating the regulations, is also improving control, which is something we always forget about later on.

The Commission proposal offers a good, coherent and precise analysis of the sector in the European Union.

It explains the importance of flax and hemp production from both an economic and an ecological point of view.

However, it seems to me that the Commission' s considerations with regard to hemp fibre and short-fibre flax are not very realistic, either as regards its future viability or its range of uses.

However, the thing that seems least appropriate to me is the proposal on processing aid.

In this case I would like to draw your attention to the increasing number of uses for this type of fibre, as several speakers have already pointed out.

If we were to follow that route, the European Union, which already falls short in terms of using this type of fibre, would cease to use it altogether, at least in some countries.

Today I read in one of my country' s newspapers that one of the autonomous regions has abandoned more than 95% of its cultivation of short-fibre flax.

These were the words of the local Minister for Agriculture for that region.

This type of situation will become inevitable if this amendment is put into practice.

With regard to payment for processing, I cannot agree with the Commission' s proposal, either in terms of the distinction between short- and long-fibre flax or its proposals for hemp.

It appears to me that they have not made any precise calculation to justify the different amounts for the premiums.

Neither does there appear to be any precise calculation to justify the maximum guaranteed quantities, either at European level or on the different national levels.

Consequently, these quantities are going to hinder development in the European Union with regard to short- and long-fibre flax and hemp.

In addition, it also seems to me to be problematic to apply these regulations during this, the 2000-2001 season, since we are already at a late stage.

I believe that Mrs Schierhuber' s proposal is a balanced one. It has been approved by a majority in the Committee on Agriculture and we should adopt it as a basic regulation.

Mr President, I wish to thank the rapporteur for her handling of what is a very complex matter where both producing and non-producing Member States have serious reservations regarding the Commission proposals.

In very broad terms, I welcome the Commission proposal to bring flax and hemp into the arable area payments scheme.

A single area payment is in line with the view that growers should respond to market demands rather than be driven by CAP subsidies.

However, I shall not repeat the many reservations about the proposals that colleagues have already mentioned.

We should note that flax and hemp are environmentally-friendly crops.

Compared with mainstream crops such as oil seeds and cereals, they require low levels of chemical and fertiliser treatment.

They also produce renewable raw materials that can displace synthetic fibres derived from petroleum and other mineral resources.

We should welcome, therefore, the expansion of industrial crop activity and the opportunities provided for diversification.

However, I wish to raise the question of land eligibility, which appears to be a particular problem in the UK.

Most of the flax and hemp grown in the UK is on land ineligible for arable area payments.

The Commission proposals, as I understand them, threaten the UK growers and would leave UK processors with no domestic supply of raw material.

It has been suggested that the land eligibility rules should be disregarded for flax and hemp so that any land could be used for those crops, but without an increase in the base area.

This would allow expansion, should market conditions encourage growth, and allow new growers to enter the market.

It would be helpful if the Commissioner could comment on this matter when he responds to the debate.

Mr President, I would firstly like to thank the rapporteur, Mrs Schierhuber.

I have a feeling that this type of subject matter is right up her street.

I can only say that I agree with the thrust of her report.

I think it is indeed time that the Commission intervened in a support regulation for flax and hemp.

Large-scale fraud, misuse and so forth can only give agricultural policy a bad name, and this must be avoided.

That is why the Commission was right to intervene.

At this stage, however, there is another reason why the Commission would do well to devote special attention to this subject matter, as I am still of the opinion that it is necessary to develop agricultural crops other than the traditional crops grown at present.

Flax and hemp are typical crops which could help us find new markets for new agricultural products.

'Agrificatie' (agrification) is the correct Dutch term for this and I will have a look in due course to see how this has been translated in the different languages.

Encouraging initiatives have been taken in this field and large investments have been made in various countries.

In my opinion, the Commission should, more than anything, ensure that investments already made in factories and processing materials are used to the best effect.

I am thus not persuaded that it is absolutely vital to tie certain quotas to certain countries.

Instead, they should be tied to certain user capacities.

There is one aspect, however, not covered by the regulation, which works out quite well for Commissioner Fischler, namely that it will not cost him a penny.

Could he not consider making the use of these products made from flax or hemp compulsory?

It could be laid down in the law, in the interest of the environment, that dashboards for cars should be made of such and such products.

Maybe this could culminate in excellent relations with the Environment Commissioner, because I have the impression that she has a habit of hampering agriculture in other areas of the environment.

Perhaps this initiative could help us to turn the corner.

Mr President, Commissioner Fischler, the Commission appears to have made a sound proposal, but in actual fact, this is not a sound proposal.

It may possibly prevent fraud because there is no longer an incentive for farmers to pocket the higher flax premium instead of set-aside or cereals premiums.

The only problem is that if you cut the flax premium to the level of the cereals premium and the set-aside premium, then no more flax or hemp will be cultivated in the EU and that will be that.

But if you introduce processing aid, where, in your view, fraud cannot be committed - and incidentally it can actually, but let us assume for now that it cannot - then the result might be that the raw material is grown outside the EU and imported.

If we want to ensure that flax is cultivated here, then we need to do precisely what we have proposed here, what the rapporteur has proposed, namely to go back to the level of the cereals premium.

When proof is then furnished that processing has taken place the amount is doubled, and this proof will not require very many checks because it has to be provided by those who wish to have this premium.

I should like to make the following comment on the maximum quantities: the fact that the budget has expanded because of fraud - and here the Commission has not distinguished itself in terms of controls - is not something of which we can approve.

Obviously, we have to push back the tide of fraud and the money which has been lost because of fraud needs, of course, to be traced. But the overall budget for this important, environmentally-friendly crop needs to be increased, and that is why the quotas which are now being laid down are inappropriate.

Mr Fischler, I am curious to hear whether you are going to accept the proposals made by the rapporteur - and I should like to thank her for her report.

You know what procedure this is.

If you say that you cannot accept them, we will react tomorrow and then we will have to negotiate this sound proposal from the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development at another level.

Mr President, the aid scheme for flax and hemp has turned into pure subsidy-hunting.

It is almost criminal how grossly the scheme has been misused, and we must put a stop to this.

For a number of years, aid for hemp has been much higher than that for other crops.

Per-hectare aid for hemp is more than twice as high as that for cereals.

This means that, even though there are almost no legal uses for hemp, the area used for hemp cultivation has quadrupled in the course of the last year.

The desire to retain the high per-hectare aid for hemp is, in reality, a result of the very odd collaboration between, on the one hand, those who want to see cannabis legalised and, on the other hand, speculators in EU subsidies, for it is, in actual fact, impossible to see any difference between cannabinol-free hemp and the hemp which is used to produce hashish.

The Commission proposes that aid for hemp should be reduced in three phases to the level of aid that has been set for cereals.

I should ideally have liked to see aid reduced immediately to the aid level for cereals, but I can happily live with the Commission' s proposal.

It gives farmers time to adapt.

I cannot, however, live with the recommendation from the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development.

It cannot be in accordance with modern, forward-looking and enlargement-oriented agricultural policy to propose that the transitional arrangements should be further extended.

That would be "far out" of place! Moreover, it is something I shall be voting against.

Where flax is concerned, the Commission also proposes to limit the opportunity for subsidy-hunting and, here too, the Committee is in favour of improving the scheme.

I take the opposite view, namely that the aid should be limited.

It should be the market and consumers who decide what should be produced, not sky-high EU subsidies.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, my particular thanks go firstly to the rapporteur, Mrs Schierhuber, for her comprehensive survey of the situation and her excellent report.

The debate on reforms in the sphere of flax and hemp grown for fibre has been going on now for almost five years, if you take 1996 and the proposals which the Commission made then as the starting point.

In place of the reform proposed by the Commission at that time, however, the Council simply stepped up controls.

This certainly increased administrative expenditure considerably, but largely failed to achieve the desired, and necessary, effect: subsidy-hunting continued and the area under cultivation increased from around 100 000 hectares to 240 000 hectares, with the result that budgetary expenditure on this sector was, virtually, more than doubled.

The proposal before you today has three main objectives.

It is intended to put a stop to subsidy-hunting once and for all.

The Commission wishes to foster rural development by supporting traditional cultivation and production methods, and it wants to help farmers over a limited period of time to find profitable new sales outlets and to increase their sales potential.

You see we are not under any illusions!

In the light of budgetary constraints - with which everyone is familiar - the sector has to be more market-oriented.

An even more important point is that, following the Berlin decisions, no new money is envisaged for the promotion of new products.

Such new products may be perfectly interesting for agriculture, but our message must be honest here: the overriding objective with innovations of this kind has to be profitability.

The Commission has carefully examined Parliament' s amendments.

Many of them are acceptable to us, at least in essence; others are not acceptable in their current form but prompt further reflection.

Then there are others which, I am afraid, we cannot accept.

I now turn to the first proposal on including flax and hemp grown for fibre in the arable crops regulation.

I am prepared to accept Amendment No 2, which concerns the formulation of the objectives, and Amendment No 1, at least in spirit.

The idea of doubling aid per hectare when proof is provided that the straw has been processed into fibres seems, at first sight, to be very tempting, Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf.

However, in my opinion, it is doomed to failure. This is because, by introducing it, we would de facto be creating first and foremost fresh incentives for renewed subsidy-hunting, and ultimately we would again have to rely on controls which have hitherto already proved to be insufficiently effective.

Consequently, I do not agree with Amendments Nos 3, 9, 10 and 12 nor, for similar reasons, with Amendment No 38.

In Amendment No 4, however, fears about the rules on land eligibility are expressed which were addressed in particular by Messrs Adam and Wyn.

I agree with them that we need a sensible solution here, and that is why I can agree in principle to Amendment No 4.

The same goes for Amendment No 37 which is along the same lines.

Amendments Nos 7, 8 and 15, regarding derogations from the provisions for arable crops in respect of surface area and set-aside, are acceptable to the extent that they are in line with the agreement on Agenda 2000, but only within this framework.

In my opinion, they are actually no longer necessary because there is land all over the place within the surface area on which flax and hemp can be grown without limiting the amount of other crops that are cultivated.

Nevertheless, problems could arise in some areas.

We will try to find a solution here, so as to reduce the possible constraints which might arise.

I can accept Amendment No 6 on hemp.

However, irregular plots cannot simply stop being subject to checks altogether, as is recommended, at least implicitly, in Amendments Nos 5 and 16 and I cannot therefore agree to these amendments.

There could be room for a certain amount of flexibility, however, where it is a question of achieving high control levels.

That is why I can state my agreement with these amendments and with Amendment No 14 at least in this respect.

It is because of the risks for the image of hemp that the Commission is proposing a ban on hemp and hempseed being used in food, despite the fact that the varieties which have to be used in Europe do not contain any psychotropic substances.

This is a highly political issue which we can certainly discuss further.

However, at the present time, I do not wish to agree to Amendments Nos 11, 13 and 32.

But the actual objective is clear.

I now come to the second proposal, on the regulation on the common organisation of the market in flax and hemp grown for fibre.

Processing aid has to be in reasonable proportion to production costs and take account of the market value of the products.

It is a fact that processing long-flax fibres entails higher costs.

A distinction must therefore be drawn between processing aid for long-flax fibres and aid for short-flax fibres and hemp fibre.

Maximum permitted impurity levels also need to be fixed because the aid is intended to promote the production of high-quality fibre and not of the waste entailed in fibre production.

Our policy for the sector has to be unambiguous.

We can only accept investment in products which are profitable under market conditions.

That is why I cannot agree to Amendments Nos 18 and 34, even though they definitely contain further food for thought.

I do agree, however, with the ideas underlying Amendments Nos 23, 25 and 26, that is to bring the aid payable for long and short fibres more closely into line and to make the granting of aid dependent on the result of checks.

Nevertheless, the limits given in the budget cannot be exceeded.

The second important subject is the national guaranteed quantities.

In view of the well-known difficulties with checking harvest results, these are absolutely indispensable.

The Commission proposal mitigates the risk of abuse at the processing stage without quotas having to be set for the individual processing plants, and thus without the disadvantages which quotas of this kind would have on an expanding market.

A maximum guaranteed quantity for the whole Community would not be a solution.

Experience shows that this only leads to disputes between Member States and makes it more difficult to find a real solution.

Dividing the maximum guaranteed quantity between the Member States annually, on the basis of processing capacity - which cannot be verified - is not really a practicable alternative.

That is why I cannot accept Amendments Nos 20, 21, 27 to 30 and 35.

But the idea of introducing a kind of newcomer quota and dividing this each year between those Member States where there is only very little flax and hemp production at the present time, or none at all, is, I believe, definitely worth exploring.

I can accept Amendments Nos 24 and 33 for those instances when the farmer and the primary processor are one and the same person.

As far as the import of hemp and hempseed is concerned, I agree that we need a practicable solution.

However, I cannot agree to Amendments Nos 22 and 31 in their current form because they implicitly say that no further controls need to be carried out.

Turning, in conclusion, to the timetable, I am also prepared to accept Amendments Nos 17 and 36, in accordance with which the new rules would only enter into force on 1 July 2001.

But this would mean that the aid per hectare for the next marketing year would have to be set this year in accordance with the system currently in force.

In this case, I would be bound by the figures in the 2001 budget.

A reform of this sector is absolutely essential!

I think that you agree with me on this.

We need to make the fibre flax and hemp sector more market-oriented so that it is able to make an effective, indisputable and useful contribution to the economy and is no longer the target of public criticism.

Under these circumstances, I would have thought that you would have attached great importance to adopting the resolution this week, so that the Council can also take a decision as soon as possible.

In this way we can avoid the market disruption which would ensue in the 2000/2001 financial year if the level of the aid was not settled by 1 August.

For all that - as I have told you - I can accept 13 of the amendments and, as regards many of the others as well, I have specifically emphasised that, although I cannot accept them as they stand at the moment, some of them definitely provide further food for thought and material for debates which I will initiate in the Council.

However, because the market really will be severely disrupted if we do not have a scheme in place in time, we would either have to adopt temporary preventive measures - which would have to take account of the initial budget estimates for 2001 - or we will have a harvest where the producers will not know what payments they can expect to receive.

We really should not allow this kind of situation to develop.

It would be simply unthinkable to have to explain to the producers and also the processors why they should have to suffer because we cannot manage to decide on a proposal which, after all, has already been on the table in this House for eight months.

Mr President, allow me to ask the Commissioner one more question.

Commissioner, you mentioned the controls which will need to be carried out in connection with the processing premium, and these must indeed take place.

Now if you combine our proposal to double the aid per hectare when proof is furnished with the proof for the processing aid, which also has to be provided, and if you join these two things together - of course this is not elaborated upon in the report - then the controls which need to be carried out for both kinds of premium are guaranteed and farmers do not lose out.

If you implement your scheme, as proposed, you will be depriving European flax and hemp growers of land and that has nothing to do with controls.

Mr President, with your permission I should like to ask the Commissioner a supplementary question.

I fully agree with you that we must not let it reach such a point that the poor farmers and processors do not know what lies in store for them or what their prospects are for the future.

That is why I should like to ask you this specific question, Commissioner: can you envisage - and I am referring here to Amendments Nos 27 and 28 and to my previous comments - that the Commission might, after all, consider rethinking its proposal on quotas and restructuring it?

Perhaps I will begin with the second question, which was asked by the rapporteur.

If I have correctly understood what this is about, you are referring first and foremost to the so-called newcomer quotas.

In this regard, I have said that we are prepared to accept a quota of this kind.

I now turn to the first question, which was asked by Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf.

I am sorry, but what you are proposing is still based on an assumption, namely that this check is carried out.

It is simply the case that the current system is not working and that is why I believe we have no choice but to change it.

And so I do not want us to turn the system completely on its head.

If we go back partly to the old system again then I do not see how we can make it work and why it should work any better than it has in the past.

Thank you very much, Commissioner Fischler.

The vote will take place on Tuesday at 12 noon.

The next item is the report (A5-0130/2000) by Mr Rothley, on behalf of the Parliament Delegation to the Conciliation Committee, on the joint text, adopted by the Conciliation Committee, on a European Parliament and Council directive on the approximation of laws of the Member States relating to insurance against civil liability in respect of the use of motor vehicles and amending Directives 73/239/EEC and 88/357/EEC (Fourth Motor Insurance Directive) (C5-0111/2000 - 1997/0264(COD)).

Mr President, I must, and can, be brief.

This week we are able, for the first time, to adopt a European Union legislative act which has been drawn up on the initiative of the European Parliament and on which, thank God, the Commission and the Council have cooperated positively.

It is about improved protection for accident victims in the European Union.

This directive resolves a large number of the problems which usually arise when people are involved in an accident in another country.

First of all, however, and before looking back, I wish to take a look into the future.

Commissioner Bolkestein, a draft fifth directive already exists.

I have drawn it up and it will soon be put before Parliament.

I very much hope that we will also be able to cooperate closely on this issue.

The fifth directive is therefore already in the pipeline.

At the beginning of June - this is also part of our glance into the future - we will be holding a conference at the Academy of European Law in Trier on another important issue, the reform of personal injury, and this may give rise to a further parliamentary initiative.

As you can see, we wish this debate on improved protection for accident victims to gain a certain momentum.

I would be very grateful to you in particular, Commissioner, if we could achieve this together.

I would be grateful to you because you made an important contribution - and this is where I start to look back - to the debate on the fourth directive.

You see there was the major problem of deciding whether this directive ought to apply when the accident had taken place in a Member State of the European Union.

I have never understood why the Commission initially fought against this so stubbornly; its stance could not be justified from a logical, political or legal point of view.

Then, thankfully, when we discussed this in Parliament at the end of last year, you prepared the ground for us to make this possible.

This directive will now apply in all countries which are members of the green card system, meaning that approximately 90% of all accidents in which Europeans might be involved will be covered.

And while I am on the subject of figures, we are talking about approximately 500 000 accidents a year in the European Union alone - not counting third countries - where we will be able to settle claims much more easily in the future. In the past there was the problem that people had to cope with a foreign language, foreign laws and so on.

Sometimes the process dragged on for ages. When I look at the petitions which have been sent to the European Parliament' s Committee on Petitions because claims arising from traffic accidents in another country have taken years and years to settle, I am quite sure that this directive constitutes a very decisive step forward.

Obviously, we cannot in any way change either the law which has to be applied or the legal jurisdiction, but by now proposing a system whereby each insurer has a claims representative in every other country, we will probably be able, as far as the accident victim is concerned, satisfactorily to settle the claims arising from 90% of all traffic accidents which take place in another country.

That is a very big step forward.

When we debated this, some questions were still open.

I did, and I would just mention this point, rather regret the fact that the compensation bodies - and these were, after all, the Commission' s idea - were gradually watered down during the political consultation process.

Nevertheless, at the end of the day, we did find a solution which is satisfactory, but in three to four years' time we will review what this directive has achieved and, if necessary, propose improvements.

In conclusion, I should like to say that thanks to your intervening, Commissioner, important progress has been made on this directive, and I should specifically like to thank you for that.

You overcame resistance from within your own Commission.

This was a great achievement and we thank you very much for it.

I hope that, where the protection of accident victims and its improvement is concerned, we will also enjoy fruitful cooperation in the future.

Mr President, I wish to express the heartfelt thanks of the Commission to Mr Rothley, the rapporteur, who has had a considerable intellectual and political input into this fourth motor insurance directive.

Mr Rothley was extremely kind in thanking the Commission for what it has done.

The Commission has perhaps been constructive in the formulation of this fourth motor insurance directive.

However, as Mr Rothley said, it was in response to an initiative from the European Parliament.

The Commission is duly thankful to him for that initiative.

I wish to say that the Commission welcomes the adoption of this fourth motor insurance directive by Parliament.

As Mr Rothley pointed out, every year there are more than 500 000 car accidents involving vehicles from different Member States.

However, the current system of compensation for people involved in an accident outside their home country does not work satisfactorily.

The new directive will provide for improved information, easier procedures and quicker settlement of claims, and these are things which concern the citizens of all our Member States most directly.

This is also a measure which will bring the European Union closer to the citizens of the Union.

As I have just said, the Commission's proposal was a response to a parliamentary resolution in which Parliament made use of its new powers under Article 192 of the Treaty on European Union.

I should again like to thank Parliament explicitly and, of course, Mr Rothley, but also the competent committee and its chairperson, Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi, for the constructive discussions in the first and second readings of the directive and the subsequent negotiations in the course of informal trialogues.

Mr Rothley has announced a fifth directive.

He said that there will shortly be a conference in Trier on that directive and he has asked the Commission to help steer it through its legislative process.

Perhaps it is a bit early to discuss the fifth directive now but I should like to take this opportunity to assure Mr Rothley that in any further legislative work in which this Parliament would like to engage, the Commission will take the same constructive attitude as it took with the fourth directive.

Lastly, Mr Bigliardo draws attention to the fact that the premia for motor vehicle insurance in Italy vary from region to region, according to the number of accidents.

He objects to that differentiation in premia according to the frequency of accidents in the various parts of Italy and he would like the Commission to intervene.

I have to tell Mr Bigliardo that this is a matter which does not concern this directive.

Strictly speaking, I could end my response there but his comments deserve a fuller answer.

Therefore, I should like to say that if the situation had been that motor insurance premia were different for Italian citizens as compared with French or German citizens living in Italy, the Commission would be able to object.

You cannot ask French or German citizens living in Italy to pay a different premium from Italian citizens.

That is a clear case of discrimination.

But that is not the case.

The premia differ according to the number of accidents in each region and are therefore the same for Italians and non-Italians.

They relate to the different areas of Italy.

I do not think that the Commission can intervene on that point.

It is a matter of how insurance companies calculate their premia, and if there are objective reasons for charging a higher premium for a particular region then the Commission is powerless.

If Mr Bigliardo would like to substantiate his claim in more detail, I should be pleased to receive his letter and answer it.

But if he would like a straightforward answer now, then it has to be that the Commission cannot intervene.

Thank you very much, Commissioner Bolkestein.

The vote will take place on Tuesday at 12 noon.

The next item is the recommendation for second reading (A5-0114/2000) by Mr Martínez Martínez on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation, on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council regulation on development cooperation with South Africa (C5-0100/2000 - 1999/0070(COD)).

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, a few days ago the Committee on Development and Cooperation unanimously approved the recommendation which is today being considered by Parliament.

It had previously made a considerable effort to speed up and rationalise the negotiation of the issue, believing that voting on the new European Parliament and Council regulation on development cooperation with South Africa was an important and urgent matter.

It was important because South Africa is one of the countries which receives the most funding from the European Union for its development process.

It was urgent because the regulation which forms the basis of this cooperation and which has been in force for five years expired on 31 December 1999, from which date the different procedures in operation were left without a proper legal basis.

It is very worrying that we should find ourselves in such a situation.

In fact, in the first six months of 1999, our Parliament considered the first text proposed by the Commission, adopting six amendments and forwarding them to the Council for their consideration.

This is where the delay occurred, since the Council took no less than eight months to present their position to us.

This took us past the expiry date and led us to the legal vacuum which I just mentioned.

The Council finally presented its proposal.

Their text adopted most of the amendments which Parliament had approved on first reading and, in particular, the Council put considerably more emphasis on the references to combating poverty and achieving the international development objectives, agreed on the basis of United Nations conventions and resolutions.

Having examined the Council' s proposal, the Committee on Development and Cooperation considered it necessary to try to prevent the negotiation being prolonged by a third reading.

In other words, we intended to accept everything that seemed reasonable and limit our amendments to things which were absolutely essential, and even then in a spirit of great moderation.

There only remained two questions which appear in the amendments and which, in the form of a recommendation, our committee is submitting to the plenary.

The first question refers to commitology.

The Council wanted the Committee of Experts to control all cooperation projects relating to South Africa with a budget of over EUR 3 million.

However, we believed that this committee should guide and monitor the broad approaches to development cooperation with South Africa and only directly control larger projects, leaving the smaller ones to the normal procedures, which are the Commission' s responsibility.

Having considered all the main issues, the amendment we are presenting today finally raises the Council' s proposal from 3 to 5 million, and this committee, whose members represent the various Member States, will therefore have fewer projects to deal with and will therefore be able to concentrate more on a global view of such an important field of action.

The second proposal concerns the budgetary framework for development cooperation between the European Union and South Africa for the 7-year period, including 2000, which is referred to in the regulation under discussion.

During the previous five years the budgetary framework had been EUR 125 million per year.

The Council, with a view to budgetary restriction, decreased that allocation in its proposal and set it at EUR 112.5 million per year.

For our part, while we are signing an important Trade, Development and Cooperation Agreement with South Africa, it does not seem politically acceptable to send a message of financial cuts.

On the contrary, we should at least maintain and, where possible, increase these contributions, if only as a token gesture, although we share the concern with regard to the available resources.

Finally, the proposal approved by the Committee on Development and Cooperation, on whose behalf I am speaking, was extremely reasonable: the EUR 123.5 million already allocated for 2000 and the EUR 127 million for each of the subsequent six years, amounting to a budgetary framework of EUR 885.5 million for the seven years laid down in the regulation.

The aim is to avoid a third reading, put an end to the current intolerable legal vacuum and provide significant political impetus to our development cooperation with South Africa.

By asking you to support our proposals, we hope that the common sense and moderation which Parliament is showing will be understood by the Council.

We also hope that these proposals are acceptable to the Commission, despite the fact that theirs - 25 million for the commitology question and 850.5 million for the budgetary framework - are somewhat different to the ones that we are presenting.

If we are not understood, it will be entirely down to the Council or the Commission that we become involved in a third reading, with the consequences which the lack of a proper legal basis may have on the projects in operation in our development cooperation with South Africa.

The figure for the budgetary framework suggested by the Commission, which is very close to our own proposal, should in any event have arrived at the Committee on Development and Cooperation on time, so that Parliament could have approved it and above all with the certainty that, in the event that we had adopted it, the Council would also have accepted it.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the report under discussion here on the Union's development cooperation with South Africa, on which I particularly congratulate the rapporteur, is, leaving aside its content, a striking example of the Council's delaying tactics towards the European Parliament.

This is actually an unproblematic regulation and also, in fact, an unproblematic report.

That the Union should support development cooperation with South Africa, bearing in mind that it is one of the more successful countries on the subcontinent, has never been called into question.

This is therefore predominantly about renewing the legal base for this cooperation, as the preceding regulation expired in December 1999.

Our former fellow-MEP, Mr Fassa, presented the report for its first reading in Parliament in May of last year.

The Council accepted nearly all of the amendments.

Nevertheless, I do wonder why the Council's common position was officially only sent to Parliament in March of this year. Of course, the rapporteur also referred to this.

Delays of this kind, which might perhaps be explained by the trade agreement being negotiated in parallel, never fail, however, to amaze me.

No doubt people in South Africa itself are also asking themselves what conclusions they should draw from the Council's behaviour.

This is why I should specifically like to thank the rapporteur for making it possible, thanks to the fast-track procedure, for this report to be on the plenary agenda now, as early as May, thus allowing us to avoid any potential problems caused by a lack of legal bases in our development cooperation.

As far as the content is concerned, some areas of uncertainty had been clarified in preliminary informal consultations with the Council, which meant that this report could restrict itself to two points, the first of which is increasing the total budget to EUR 885.5 million for the period for 2000-2006, a customary parliamentary request and a necessary one.

Secondly, the threshold of EUR 5 million, which has now been settled on, constitutes a good compromise in my view.

Small projects can be planned and implemented efficiently by the institutions and organisations on the ground.

The limit of EUR 5 million gives sufficient room for manoeuvre.

In making these efforts, the rapporteur has, for his part, done everything within his power to present a proper report on the regulation.

I very much hope that we will indeed still be able to avoid the danger of a third reading, Mr Martínez Martínez.

For the time being I offer you my warmest congratulations on this.

The full significance of this report is, however, only appreciated when it is seen in the context of the other efforts being made to intensify cooperation with South Africa, first and foremost the trade agreement already mentioned.

The Union continues to attach great importance to stable development in South Africa, not only for the sake of the people there, but also because this is in the interests of the development of its neighbours north of the Limpopo.

The South Africans have already managed to put an end to legal discrimination against the majority of the population and to hold democratic elections.

Today it is a question of anchoring the rule of law more firmly in the State.

All sections of the population and all civil servants must feel a duty primarily to this State, which is under the rule of law and no longer, as they did in the past, only to their own section of the population or even to their personal associates of whom they need to take care.

From a political point of view, the Union' s adoption of this new regulation is not only an acknowledgement of the results achieved by the reform process hitherto.

It comes with definite expectations for the future, including securing law and order in all parts of the country.

I read with concern reports about the misuse of tax revenue at provincial level.

I hear with unease that corruption is also gaining ground in the police force, and that in rural areas and in townships there are police no-go areas where the poorest of the poor are left at the mercy of gangs.

Conversely, those who have something to lose wall themselves in and for their own security hire those who previously had professional roles in the army and the police.

Thus a two-tier society again emerges, and, what is more, this is in the sensitive area of internal security.

Since law and order were de facto suspended in neighbouring Zimbabwe, the morale on commercial farms south of the Limpopo has hit rock bottom.

This illustrates another decisive expectation which we have of South Africa: to set an example and be a stabilising influence on its neighbours to the north.

I expect the South African Government to take on its regional responsibilities. President Mbeki should adopt just as clear a stance as has the former President, Mr Mandela - whom we all hold in high esteem - on the events in Zimbabwe.

Standing by and letting it happen or talking up the situation helps neither the farmers nor the hundreds of thousands in Zimbabwe who are dependent on the farms for a functioning infrastructure.

Food, housing, and sometimes clinics and schools are made available to farm workers and their families.

The situation is similar in large areas of South Africa.

Obviously these are not exemplary structures, but before they are abandoned we have to ensure that those who ought to be benefiting from them receive something better in their place.

South Africa must now, in its own interests too, exert massive influence on Mugabe; otherwise it too will soon be threatened by waves of starving refugees if seed cannot be sown on the farms there now.

In its own country, not only would the rand come under increasing pressure, but the faith in the government shown by important sections of the population who would normally supply the nation's food would be severely shaken.

This cannot be in the interests of South Africa and it cannot be in our interests either!

By adopting this regulation, the Union is showing that it still backs the economic, political and societal reform process in South Africa.

The South African Government needs all sections of society to have lasting confidence in the development of the country.

I hope that this expectation too will be taken seriously in Pretoria.

The PPE-DE Group will be voting in favour of the report.

Mr President, I also warmly congratulate the rapporteur who has shown enormous commitment to this report.

We thank you very much for it.

We are clearly in a very serious situation.

The regulation for South Africa expired on 31 December 1999.

It is clear, as the rapporteur has suggested, that we need to proceed with some urgency in order to provide a legal base for our essential work in South Africa.

This budget line is the work of the European Parliament.

I was the budget rapporteur in 1994 when the Development Committee established the line.

That was because we wanted to see practical and tangible assistance for South Africa's peaceful transition to a free and democratic country.

Surely that has been one of the most encouraging events in recent history.

Now the Republic, with its new President Mr Thabo Mbeki, faces new challenges which, in my view, require sustained partnership with the European Union.

This is not the time, as others have suggested, to have the kind of mean-spirited delays that we have seen from the Council; neither is it the time for political point-scoring by other institutions of the European Union.

Indeed, it is my view that the Council has rather cynically orchestrated the eight-month delay in response to the first reading in order that it could better manage its negotiations on the South Africa trade and development agreements.

This has put life-saving programmes at risk and any delay now would exacerbate the existing impression in South Africa of a European Union which seeks only to serve its own interests first.

Coming as this does after ouzo and grappa, we are in danger of sending a very bad signal to South Africa.

Decisions need to be made. We cannot risk delay.

For example, I am very familiar with the South African Human Rights Foundation.

The Foundation for Cultural Initiatives programme, the South Africa Labour Development Trust, policing in the Eastern Cape - all these programmes would be very seriously threatened by delays.

If there is delay, if agreement is not reached on the regulation, then new programmes will be affected too.

Even the 2000 budget of EUR 1.54 million would not be committed.

Let us be clear what we are talking about.

We are talking about water and sanitation programmes which do so much to improve the quality of life of people in the townships and rural areas.

We would endanger the SADC HIV/Aids Programme, regarded by all as being one of the most efficient the European Union operates.

We risk jeopardising economic developments in the Eastern Cape and work in the Eastern Cape with the Ministry of Education.

We risk jeopardising support for social housing programmes in South Africa.

In this Parliament we have to make every effort now, as the rapporteur has said, to make it possible for this money to move as speedily and as efficiently as it can to the people of South Africa.

The European Parliament position is, and always has been, realistic and morally right.

However I must express my grave concern about the possible misery which would be caused were we to delay.

As usual we should make it very clear that we in the Development Committee regard the budget figure that we have here before us, as purely indicative.

We see it as a reference point only, not as anything that we will not seek to change when it comes to our committee.

It is the first year of the South Africa Trade Agreement.

How does it look in our first year if we do not fully commit the funding and meet our obligations?

We must continue our commitment to supporting South African efforts to overcome the legacy of apartheid.

To do that we have to have a regulation sooner rather than later.

I hope that after we have heard the Commissioner we will have the opportunity to discuss his views further and to discuss the very deeply worrying issues which delay on this regulation raises.

Mr President, apartheid in South Africa may have been abolished but it has not yet disappeared.

For example, the disparities in income between the population groups are still shocking and deprived areas in terms of housing, education and health care have not caught up by a long way.

Frustration is mounting, as is evident from the unprecedented crime rate and outrageous violence both indoors and outdoors.

They may want to escape their past, but they are compromising their own future in the process.

The key goal of development strategy should therefore be to correct the imbalance in growth created by apartheid.

If not, that country will not be able to enjoy stability, will deter foreign investors and will remain poor when it could be rich.

Needless to say, it is South Africa first and foremost that has to set its own house in order, but Europe can and must make a substantial contribution to the development process.

We therefore lend our support to the cooperation agreement, on the basis of the EUR 885.5 million, as proposed by our excellent rapporteur.

The Council has sat on the regulation for far too long.

All the signs are there that its association with the negotiations regarding the trade agreement was spurious.

The involvement of the Member States via the committee should focus more on the strategy and the indicative programme rather than on the individual projects.

A maximum of 5 million seems very reasonable to me.

This does not, however, relieve the European Union of its task of monitoring all projects well, down to the tiniest, and to evaluate them at regular intervals.

The Commission delegation must be sufficiently equipped to be able to do this independently and to a professional standard.

Mr President, South Africa has enormous potential.

There is so much there which so few have enjoyed.

Economic growth is a necessary but not an adequate condition for development.

What is needed is for resources to be better distributed and correctly allocated to meet all social needs.

The apartheid regime has been abolished, all that is left to tackle now is apartheid itself.

Mr President, I would like to start by adding my thanks and congratulations to the rapporteur.

I strongly support his aim of getting this regulation brought into force as quickly as possible with no third reading.

The rapporteur has been very generous in his interpretation of the Council's inexplicable 8-month delay in responding to Parliament's six amendments during the first reading.

If there were any evidence that the Council was deliberately holding back this regulation to give it greater leverage during the negotiations of the broader trade and development cooperation agreement, that indeed would be extremely worrying.

To come to the substance of the issue, on the budget it is completely unacceptable that the EU should be offering a budget cut in comparison to former years, particularly at this moment in our relationship with South Africa.

There is a very real risk of this triggering an even greater loss of faith by South Africa in the EU.

Let us not forget that this follows hard on the heels of the protracted and frequently bitter negotiations of the Trade and Cooperation Agreement where the EU acted very dismally indeed.

On numerous occasions, it was EU reluctance to improve access for South African agricultural goods which nearly blocked the whole deal and to follow this up with yet another dishonourable act would be extremely unfortunate.

Perhaps there is an image abroad that South Africa is an increasingly developed country and does not really need these funds.

Let us not forget that in spite of the great leaps forward that South Africa has taken, the life of many South Africans is still one of extreme poverty without work or land or a decent home.

An estimated 42% of black South Africans are jobless as compared with just 4% of whites.

A quarter of schools have no water within walking distance.

Half of South African households are classed as poor.

65% of adult South Africans are illiterate and 10 million South Africans live in informal shacks or on land they neither own nor rent.

Let us not forget either that the Commission and Council turned down the idea of a separate new financial instrument to give support to neighbouring countries which need to adjust themselves to the new framework resulting from the Trade and Cooperation Agreement.

I am not as reassured on this point as the rapporteur and I would have preferred to see a separate budget line which could have been seen and monitored more easily.

It is quite clear that substantial funds are going to be needed to ease these countries' transition.

The loss of customs duty alone is extremely high in some cases.

In Swaziland for example, this accounts for up to 40% of all government revenue.

In spite of its own challenges, South Africa is already demonstrating its commitment to support its neighbours in the region.

For example, in its agreement to a highly asymmetrical liberalisation agreement with the other SADC countries which will benefit those countries.

The European Union needs the same generosity of spirit.

It should honour its initial financial pledges to South Africa and provide significant support to the neighbouring countries during their transition period.

Mr President, it has taken a year, but we have finally reached the point where we can discuss the regulation on development cooperation with South Africa at second reading.

This is not a day too soon, because the European Programme for the Reconstruction and Development of South Africa has been without a legal basis since late 1999. In the light of this, the continuity of the development connection has been in the balance.

Accordingly, I would like to thank the rapporteur for the drive he has displayed in dealing with this subject matter.

I share his criticism regarding the eight months which the Council deemed necessary to formulate its position.

He is right in claiming that a distinction must be drawn between this regulation and the Trade, Development and Cooperation Agreement between Europe and South Africa.

Although development cooperation and trade are very much interrelated, they should not be played off against each other.

The deliberate delay in approving these regulations would seem to suggest that there is little real involvement with South Africa.

This is irrespective of how fair the European negotiating position is in terms of trade.

Moreover, such a stance does not fit in with the Commission' s strategy in terms of South Africa which it has outlined in its 2000-2002 Country Strategy.

This document addresses both the fight against poverty and improvement in infrastructure.

I did wonder, however, why it only mentions the European Union' s development instrument in passing.

Would the Commission be able to answer that?

I would also like to know from the Commission to what extent South Africa' s qualified Lomé membership overlaps with the European Programme for Reconstruction and Development.

I am, by the way, very grateful to the Commission for the large amount of information on South Africa which is available on the Internet and which has been laid out in a readily understood format.

This is an example to draw on when it comes to determining the strategy for other countries!

I would like to finish off with just one remark for the rapporteur.

I can imagine that he is intent on keeping the EUR 910 million budget for development cooperation with South Africa.

I, however, attach less importance to this, given the limited financial resources for foreign policy and the major challenges in other parts of the world.

What counts is the quality of cooperation with South Africa, which, in my opinion, is sound at present, particularly on account of the regional projects which have been financed over the past couple of years.

This is why South Africa' s neighbouring countries can also benefit from European development projects.

It seems that coherence and consistency are gradually gaining ground in the EU' s development policy.

Mr President, I would like to thank the rapporteur not only for the work he has put in to produce this report but also for the rather unique way he has had to handle the situation that the Development Committee and Parliament found itself in.

It is perhaps a sad indictment on the European institutions that, five months after the expiry date of the legal base to this Council regulation, it has only now come before Parliament, thanks, as the rapporteur and almost every other speaker has said, to an 8-month delay by the Council in responding to Parliament's first reading.

Surely we cannot continue to work in this way.

It is interesting to note that half this report is taken up by the procedural points the rapporteur has had to work his way through.

Now it has returned to us it is particularly pleasing that the Council has adopted the thrust of most of our amendments.

Most welcome is the fact that the Council has made poverty alleviation a top priority. This should strengthen the partnership between South Africa and Europe.

I have just spent a week in South Africa and there is much appreciation for all that the EU is doing to stabilise their fragile democracy.

Only by rapidly improving living standards, particularly in health, education and employment, will stability remain.

There was much resentment against some nation states at the hold-ups there had been over the new trade agreement with particular reference to spirit names.

We are doing much for South Africa and I hope, in return, President Mbeki will work for peace in the region, with particular reference to Zimbabwe.

The implication in the rapporteur's report that this regulation may have been delayed because it was being used as a bargaining chip is very worrying.

The Commission might like to comment on this particular point.

I would also like to hear from the Commission on how we can streamline the system.

In the last session in Strasbourg we had another regulation that had also run out last December and this should not happen.

I must strongly support the rapporteur and his suggestions that the Commission should be tackling the issues of major topics, such as the importance and the overall impact of the programme in relation to the agreed objectives rather than individual programmes.

I would also like to see delegate offices strengthened with more and better staff to be able to cope more efficiently with monitoring and evaluations.

This regulation is bound to have an impact on neighbouring states and I hope the Commission will take this into consideration.

The rapporteur has broken new ground on commitology which can only bode well for the future.

My group supports this regulation but asks for a speedy conclusion to the vacuum we are in.

We would not like to see any disagreement on budget amounts hold up ratification.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, in recent years South Africa has made a historic leap forward by abolishing the apartheid system and establishing a new political order based on the rule of law, respect for human rights and democracy.

If the people of South Africa have regained their freedom, this is, of course, for the most part thanks to their persistence and courage, as well as to that of their leaders, but also, it must be said, to the political and financial support provided by European Union Member States for the reform process in South Africa.

Quite clearly, the cooperation agreement signed on 10 October 1994 was a strong message that we sent this people treated so badly by history.

I must confess that the slow progress in Council negotiations for its renewal leaves me rather puzzled.

Our duty to show this country legitimate solidarity must not and cannot be sacrificed on the altar of national trading interests.

On the trade agreement, which, need I remind you, we endorsed by a large majority in this very Chamber last October, we must avoid disagreements which obstruct the adoption of this cooperation regulation.

Such an attitude would be tantamount to appalling blackmail on the part of Europe and would not be true to the spirit behind the new development and cooperation agreements with the ACP countries, i.e. establishing contracts which respect the identity, culture and dignity of each partner.

With regard to the regional cooperation aspect of this regulation, I should like, in turn, to draw the Council and the Commission' s attention to the risks of economic destabilisation which may be engendered by the regulation, and even more so by the trade agreement with South Africa.

We shall have to be particular attentive to the effects that these agreements may have on the ever vulnerable balance within the Southern African Customs Union.

I am also thinking of Namibia and Swaziland, and even Lesotho and Botswana, which are a long way from receiving the same amount of aid from Europe.

I feel that the European Union must, as a matter of urgency, take steps to arrive at an agreement with the authorities of these countries in order to compensate for any losses.

Finally, in conclusion, acknowledging our rapporteur for his clear-sightedness and for his talents as a negotiator, I should like to express my complete agreement with him on the need to remedy the existing legal vacuum to enable these agreements to come into force.

We must put an end, as a matter of urgency, to these long months of hesitation and delay, seen as so many negative signs by South Africa' s fledgling democracy, which expects more from Europe than narrow calculations in order to safeguard limited interests.

Mr President, I am apparently not the only one who hangs her head in shame when it comes to South Africa.

For years, we supported the fight against apartheid and welcomed the new South Africa with excitement.

In 1995, it became our key partner in development cooperation.

The fact that that country received most support from Europe was justified. After all, South Africa had to be - and still is - the driving force behind development in Southern and Central Africa.

But it took too long for programmes to get underway and, when the date for the legal basis lapsed, we did not have a new regulation in place for our development cooperation.

In his eminent report, the rapporteur emphatically referred to the expiry date of 31 December 1999.

The Council needed no fewer than eight months to determine its position.

This was, of course, not down to fundamental differences of opinion, but, as many of the delegates have already hinted at here, because the development money was used as a means of exerting pressure to secure European trade interests and to exact a trade agreement, in which our much talked of alcoholic beverages had to be protected once again.

We are deeply ashamed about such a state of affairs, which resembles a cattle market.

There is another reason to feel ashamed.

A proportion of the money which we want to spend in the European countries to reconstruct Kosovo is being taken from the development cooperation with South Africa.

Instead of increasing the funding by 1%, in line with inflation, and reaching the amount of EUR 885.5 million, as is also suggested by our rapporteur, we will be proposing a 10% reduction.

Eventually, Commissioner Schreyer proposed EUR 850 million, or 121 million annually, 5 million less to invest in the fight against poverty which we deem so important.

Mr President, Commissioner, we will naturally assent to the amendments tabled by the Committee on Cooperation and Development.

We want the reconstruction of Kosovo. We are happy to finance it, but not with money intended to combat poverty.

We also support the second amendment.

It may seem less important, but I think that the resources for the procedure should be retained.

If we oblige our committee to address the individual programme points, there will be considerably less time and energy for tackling the efficiency of the programme as a whole.

This is why we give our wholehearted support to the rapporteur.

Mr President, I want first of all to thank Mr Martínez Martínez for all the hard work he has put into this regulation.

The European Parliament cannot possibly support cutting development aid to South Africa by ten per cent.

Of course, I deeply regret the fact that the Council sat on this urgent matter for eight months so that there has been no legal basis for cooperation work since the beginning of the year.

Relations between the European Union and South Africa must not be damaged.

South Africa ought to - and must - be the European Union' s greatest and best friend in Africa, for South Africa will play a quite decisive role in the whole continent' s future.

In times of large-scale conflict on the African continent, for example in Congo, Angola, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Sierra Leone, Uganda, Rwanda and Algeria - not to mention the intense unrest of recent months in Zimbabwe and the hatred which President Mugabe has been stirring up there - South Africa and the country' s remarkably strong democratic institutions constitute a constructive and stabilising factor in leading Africa towards a brighter and more peaceful future.

South Africa has a vigorous constitution with a clear commitment to human rights and freedoms. The country has a constitutional court whose judgements are respected by the president.

Free elections have been held. There is freedom of the press, and the office of president was in a peaceful and orderly state when the country' s great reconciler and nation builder, Nelson Mandela, left it.

The Truth Commission, led by the Anglican bishop, Desmond Tutu, has demonstrated its willingness to strive for genuine reconciliation in South Africa.

Sweden' s prime minister called the Cairo Conference, held earlier this year between the EU and Africa, "the start of something new and great" .

A democratic and reconciled South Africa is the prerequisite for this "something new and great" , in which Africa and the countries of Europe meet on a new and equal footing and look forward, instead of remaining stuck in the old colonial period.

South Africa is a necessary engine of democracy for the whole of South Africa and for Africa in its entirety.

It can show that it is freedom, together with democratic and strong ethical and moral values, through which Africa can advance furthest.

- (PT) Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, Parliament is due to state its position at second reading on the regulation that forms the legal base for the general framework of cooperation between the European Union and South Africa.

In the meantime, as you will remember, the Council of Ministers of the European Union adopted the General Agreement on Trade, Development and Cooperation last September on the basis of the Kinnock report, whose trade component was implemented in January of this year.

One of the fundamental components of the trade agreement concerns wines, and South Africa committed itself, under the terms of the agreement signed at the Berlin Summit in March 1999, immediately to cease using certain Community designations of origin, such as, specifically, "Port" and "Sherry" , which it had been using illegally for twelve years.

Following a few incredibly intricate episodes, successive adjournments and time-wasting manoeuvres by the South African negotiators in accepting a regulatory text for this agreement, both parties finally agreed that a new draft of the regulations for this agreement on wines, which is due to enter into force by 1 September, is to be laid down by the end of June.

I have, however, received information to the effect that the South Africans are still raising problems with regard to a draft which faithfully reflects the Berlin Agreement.

They are trying to have these wine-producing issues covered by the WTO TRIPS dossier, which the European Union feels does not adequately protect Community designations.

Furthermore, it appears to be a position that has been reached in conjunction with other New World wine-producing countries, given that the South Africans were negotiating bilateral agreements on wines with the European Union and then they suddenly changed their minds and wanted to postpone everything.

In view of these issues, I cannot agree with the rapporteur when he asks Parliament, as proof of good faith, to approve this framework regulation as a matter of urgency, without linking it to the trade aspect of the General Agreement on Trade, Development and Cooperation.

I do not agree because all the European Union' s behaviour up until now has been nothing but a huge demonstration of good faith, to the extent that, contrary to what had previously been laid down, we accepted the commercial implementation of the agreement without the regulations for the agreement on wines being established.

The time has come to say enough is enough!

Cooperation requires a positive attitude of good faith and responsibility on the part of both cooperating parties.

As this has not been the case, I cannot, in all conscience, support the rapporteur' s position.

Mr President, the Commission is appreciative of the rapporteur's excellent work and welcomes the recommendation on the Council common position which reflects Parliament's commitment to assist the new South Africa.

We too are worried about the delays in the adoption of the regulation and share the view that quick adoption of the regulation on the European programme for reconstruction and development is now becoming essential and critical.

It would be a signal to South Africa of our dedication to the effective entry into force of the agreement on trade development and cooperation and would prevent new tensions arising around issues still to be discussed concerning wines and spirits or fisheries.

If, however, the Community is unable to adopt the regulation in time, our development programme for this year will be jeopardised and confidence undermined.

We also totally share the rapporteur's view that the Council common position contains useful improvements to the Commission's proposal.

However, on commitology and the financial framework, we also consider that the common position is inadequate and cannot be followed.

Indeed, as regards Amendment No 1, on Article 8(5) and (6) on commitology, your proposal for a EUR 5m threshold is, to be frank, somewhat disappointing compared to the level of EUR 25m we had proposed.

We proposed such a level in order to use the committed resources in a more efficient and useful way and to deal with strategic issues rather than the details of individual projects.

But in the South Africa case, we are ready to accept the EUR 5m threshold simply in order not to delay a decision.

It appears from our programming discussions with the South African Government that we will have a limited number of major sectoral programmes which we think have to be discussed in any case with the Member States.

The EUR 5m level gives us enough room to proceed quickly with some small projects, for instance preparatory actions or pilot operations.

But we definitely need to make clear that no precedent should be created for the Council to impose low commitology thresholds.

I should like to retain the possibility of increasing this threshold for the South Africa budget line in the future, if need be.

Regarding Amendment No 2, Article 10(1) on the financial framework: the Commission has been aware on the one hand of the need to respect the political commitment in the trade and development cooperation agreement to maintain assistance to South Africa but, on the other hand, we have to take into account the very difficult budgetary situation caused by the new commitments made for assistance in the Balkans.

As a result, the Commission has agreed on the necessary budget adjustments to accommodate new needs.

This exercise has been very complex: it has required a very sensitive balancing of the political priorities across the EU's regional programmes.

But we envisage stabilisation for South Africa at the average level of around EUR 122m per annum, with a global figure of some EUR 850.5m in the period 2000-2006.

This is below your proposal of EUR 885.5m but it is significantly higher than the EUR 787.5m the Council proposed.

The South African programme is in fact one of the least affected by the proposed changes within heading IV and the adjustment will not affect the nature and scope of the programme as envisaged.

I understand your determination not to reduce the financial amounts for development aid to South Africa.

However, I find it absolutely necessary that the regulation is adopted in time to ensure uninterrupted implementation of activities in South Africa.

This situation is indeed very critical and not a normal, routine situation - but unfortunately it is what we are facing - and I feel an obligation to do my utmost to secure agreement between the Council, Parliament and the Commission on the proposed approach.

I am therefore anxious both to discuss the matter again with the Committee on Development and Cooperation in Parliament and before that to seek a response from the Member States.

Bearing that in mind, I should welcome it if Parliament would consider whether the vote on Amendment No 2 could be postponed so that these discussions can take place.

This is the safest way to reduce the risk of a much more serious and longer delay threatening the credibility of our cooperation with South Africa.

Mr President, you have heard the Commissioner' s request that the vote be delayed, that is, that it should not take place tomorrow.

I must say that this situation disturbs me, because we are all working very quickly and the Commission seems to be saying that, since we are in a hurry, we must drive the car very slowly.

On principle, I am always willing to discuss issues again.

Firstly, I must thank the spokespeople of the different Groups for their support, although I believe that they are lending their support to a very modest position by the committee, almost a critical type of support, because the Committee on Development and Cooperation should have gone much further than it decided.

I repeat: in principle, I would not be opposed, but I do not believe that Parliament is in favour of delaying the vote.

I do not feel at the moment that Parliament wishes to delay the vote.

That would mean inviting the Commissioner to the Committee on Development next week and postponing our decision until June.

I would not be opposed to that and I do not reject that possibility.

But I must say, Mr President, that it worries me profoundly that Parliament should have to take responsibility for prolonging something which, in fact, has been prolonged by all parties.

Everyone has prolonged this process: the Council and the Commission.

Now the pressure is on Parliament because we have been told that, if we do not accept the positions of the Council and of the Commission, the development programmes will come to a standstill, which would be terrible.

I agree that it would be terrible if the cooperation programmes came to a standstill.

However, Mr President, we should take note of who is being pressurised and who really bears the responsibility for prolonging this process and taking it to a third reading.

Therefore, Mr President, I would ask you to examine whether it would be proper to consult Parliament tomorrow on whether or not to vote on our positions.

If we do vote on them tomorrow, it will fall to the Council and the Commission to ensure that the situation is not prolonged, which would create serious difficulties for South Africa and our own dignity.

We must ask ourselves whether we are here solely to accept, at any time and under any kind of pressure, what the Council or the Commission proposes.

If that is the case, then Parliament is unnecessary and all our dignity as an institution has been lost.

I am therefore not opposed to the vote being delayed for another month.

I believe that it would be very dangerous to prolong this process, but, in any event, we must not take responsibility. The responsibility falls to those people who have dragged it out until now and who seem to want it to last even longer, perhaps because the issue of the designations of origin of wines and alcoholic drinks is being negotiated.

The Commissioner can speak for himself but the Commission was not requesting postponement of the vote.

The Commission was simply making a point on Amendment No 2, as I understand it.

Perhaps the Commissioner would like to explain the point he was making on the amendment.

As the President said, it is perfectly correct that I am not in a position to request anything, and it would be out of line with my own feeling and understanding of the relations between the Commission and Parliament if I did so.

I said I would welcome it if a postponement of the vote were considered as a possibility.

It is totally in the hands of Parliament, as it should be.

However, I feel I have a responsibility vis-à-vis Parliament to make it totally clear that I see a real danger of this ending up in a long, difficult postponement - something that will create delays in our current activities in South Africa.

It is simply in order to minimise that risk that I am expressing my views as I have here.

The decision is, of course, totally in Parliament's hands.

Any motion to delay a vote would have to be put to the House immediately before the vote which will be taken at noon on Tuesday.

(The sitting was closed at 8.50 p.m.)

Mr President, the Committee on Industry considers that this is an extremely important issue and should be dealt with as a matter of great urgency.

We all know the reasons why the situation affecting Montenegro is a complex one and we should not, for obvious reasons, delay this matter any further.

I therefore propose producing a simplified report so that we can vote on urgent procedure.

Mr Wynn, chairman of the Committee on Budgets, asked for an opinion, has the floor.

Mr President, we are in a strange situation because a decision was taken in the groups before the Committee on Budgets had decided on this issue of Montenegro.

Also, I have not had a chance to speak to my good friend Mr Westendorp.

I believe that the chairman of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy is sympathetic to the position of the Committee on Budgets, which I am about to state.

However, since I have not spoken to him directly, do not quote me on that - it is only second-hand information.

Firstly, I should like to make it clear that the Committee on Budgets supports any aid to Montenegro.

It has done so in the past and will do so in the future.

On this occasion there is no urgency for this to go through now.

The monies will not be made available until August for the first tranche and the second tranche will be paid at the end of the year.

We are of the opinion that the relevant committees need to study the details of this proposal.

Whichever the lead committee is - Foreign Affairs or Industry - we would merely give an opinion, but those committees and Parliament need to evaluate these proposals.

We should not be bounced into a decision because the Council deems it to be necessary.

As for budgets, our main concern is where the money is coming from.

It is great to make proposals but we feel this urgency should not be agreed upon until we know where the money is coming from.

We should leave it until next month.

The committees can debate it and we can vote on it at the June part-session.

That is a very sensible opinion.

Mr Newton Dunn, vice-chairman of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy has the floor to explain his committee' s opinion.

Mr President, we have not discussed it in the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy, but my personal view is that we should not accept urgency now.

Mr President, in my opinion, this proposal has been submitted under rather strange procedural circumstances.

Despite this, as speaker on behalf of the PPE-DE Group, I am of the opinion that the urgency is such that we need to take it extremely seriously.

Accordingly, regardless of the mistakes in the procedure, I have to say on behalf of my group that we would like to support this request for urgent procedure after all.

I also have a feeling that other groups in this House from the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy share the same view.

It might be helpful to verify this.

Mr President, I am in favour, although I take the view that it is not quite as urgent as the Council makes out.

However, it would be an insult to the people of Montenegro if we rejected this urgency today.

Montenegro is in great danger, especially from Belgrade, and I think we should send out this signal.

However, we should wait until the Commission finally tells us where it intends to find the money. It cannot take it away from Bosnia.

It cannot take it away from Kosovo.

It needs to tell us where it intends to find the money and if we reach a decision on this today, we must carry out an evaluation half way through and say what has happened to the money and where the second tranche is to come from.

Mr President, firstly, I am against the urgency for the reasons expounded by the chairman of the Committee on Budgets.

There is, in fact, no urgency because the money would be released for August.

Secondly, if we look carefully, in the line which has been applied until now, there are still EUR 20 million which have not been used.

Therefore, there is no uncertainty and no urgency and we can study this issue again, calmly, at a later date.

2001 Budget - Parliament' s estimates

The next item should be the presentation by the Commission of the preliminary draft budget for 2001.

Unfortunately, the Commissioner has not yet arrived, although she is on her way.

I therefore propose that we examine the next item on the agenda.

The next item is the report (A5-0121/2000) by Mr Ferber, on behalf of the Committee on Budgets, on the estimates for the European Parliament' s income and expenditure for the financial year 2001.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, it would truly have been a great honour to speak directly after the Commissioner' s presentation of the Commission budget 2001.

Instead, I have the honour of presenting Parliament' s budget before the Commissioner presents the larger budget to us.

As rapporteur for Parliament' s budget, I am in a position to submit a proposal to you which, in my view, has three main features.

First, and I set great store by this, the budget which we have prepared for you is a highly economical one.

Secondly, we have learned our lessons from the justified complaints of the Court of Auditors and the Committee on Budgetary Control, for which we are all to blame.

Thirdly, and this is a particular matter of concern to me, we have strengthened the European Parliament as the institution which represents the interests of the citizens of Europe.

What have we focused on in Parliament' s Budget 2001?

I should like to outline this briefly with reference to five main points.

First: in the area of buildings policy, and this is an extremely important point, we must draw the right conclusions from the objections raised by the Court of Auditors.

In other words, first, we must make the remaining payments in Brussels as quickly as possible - and we are putting the conditions in place for this - so that we can reduce costs - that is particularly important to the taxpayer - and, secondly, we must solve the problem of Strasbourg, of this building here, in a way which does not give cause for complaint.

Both are provided for by figures in the draft budget.

Secondly, we must also exercise extreme restraint in the area of staff policy in the coming year.

We cannot allow Parliament' s staff numbers to increase exorbitantly just because there is some financial room for manoeuvre.

And we must also solve the problem of promotion in the autumn in a way which is acceptable to all institutions.

Thirdly, we must prepare ourselves for the enlargement of the European Union and this applies to Parliament even more than to the other institutions.

However, this does not mean - and this is a particularly important point - that we will decide as early as next year on which new languages we can offer in our interpreting services and therefore which countries will be allowed to become members of the European Union in the first round and which will not.

That is the wrong way forward.

It is not the job of the budget to make such fundamental political decisions.

They need to be taken elsewhere; in other words, we do, of course, need to talk to language schools in the candidate countries and we must develop and build up programmes, but we must also, of course, be clear that we cannot anticipate decisions which need to be taken at a political level first.

I am pleased to see the Commissioner is now with us.

I have taken over your role insofar as we are discussing Parliament' s budget first and shall then move on to the Commission' s budget.

No I do not want your job, only you can do it, the role reversal does not stretch quite that far!

Fourthly, we must take account of the increase in the responsibility of the European Parliament since the Amsterdam Treaty entered into force.

The current Members of the European Parliament have more responsibility and more work in comparison with all their predecessors than ever before and naturally that also makes itself felt when it comes to preliminary work and technical equipment.

I should like to thank everyone who supported me in this matter of concern.

My fifth point is that this increased responsibility must also find expression with regard to groups in the European Parliament.

I want to see a political parliament fighting for just causes and that means widening the basis for group work; it also means - and I make no bones about the fact - limiting the official services of the European Parliament.

That is the only way of achieving a parliament with an enduring public profile.

I was pleased to note that the Bureau of the European Parliament is thinking along the same lines and that one of the vice-presidents from my group is preparing a report on the subject.

That is the right way forward.

I have taken note of the amendments to my report proposed by my fellow delegates with a great deal of interest.

I hope you will understand that I can support very few, because they no longer follow, in fact, they abandon the line which I presented in the Committee on Budgets and which was adopted by a majority in the committee.

We must prepare for enlargement, but we do not need to start recruiting interpreters from the candidate countries as early as next year.

Even the buildings policy must be considered with a view to enlargement, but I see no need to do so in the Budget 2001.

We need to be a bit more realistic in our approach to the important question of enlargement.

We moved into a new building in Brussels three years ago, we moved into a new building here in Strasbourg a year ago and if we tap the taxpayer on the shoulder again so soon after and say we need more buildings, more office space, he is only likely to agree to so much.

We need to take account of that in our calculations.

A budget with EUR 987 million is not very much in comparison to the budget of over EUR 90 billion which the Commissioner will propose shortly, but this is the taxpayers' money and we must take our decision as the trustees of that money.

The taxpayer expects us to take a prudent approach not only when we draw up the budget, but also when we implement and carry it out.

We shall have to discuss this again in September during the first reading of this budget, once all the documents from the budget discharge procedure have been submitted.

I should like today to thank the Bureau of the European Parliament, especially the vice-president responsible for budgetary questions, Gerhard Schmid, for their constructive cooperation, especially during the conciliation procedure between the Bureau and the Committee on Budgets.

My thanks also go to the corresponding departments of Parliament' s administration for their prompt and conscientious preliminary work, without which this set of figures could never have been drawn up.

However, I should also like to extend my special thanks to my colleagues in the Committee on Budgets for their fair cooperation.

Bringing divergent opinions together to a consensus, mostly with too little time to spare, is not always easy.

So my compliments to all my comrades-in-arms and finally, of course, a heartfelt thank-you to the secretarial staff of the Committee on Budgets for having prepared everything promptly and reliably in these difficult times.

I think I can present you with a budget which has earned Parliament' s confidence.

Mr President, I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on the excellent work that he is doing for our House in terms of getting value for money out of our budget.

It is not right that we should be expecting the Commission to do a whole range of things in putting their House and their budget in order unless we also take the same kinds of rigorous steps.

The approach which has been taken is absolutely correct, not only in making sure that we do not simply give money away if we have a little spare in the budget, but also where we have asked the Secretary-General of Parliament to come forward with a number of reports: for example, in paragraph 6 of the resolution where we have asked the Secretary-General to look at and identify job needs in the same way as the Commission so that we can match job needs to the staff which we have available in the longer term.

That quite clearly is a way of long-term planning which is very sensible at this stage of Parliament's life.

There are three things which I would like to emphasise in particular in this Parliament Budget 2001.

The first is a plea from an individual parliamentarian that we should make sure that we have a date firmly fixed for the second network computer in our offices.

It is a matter of frustration for many of us that our staff can access the net with their computers, of course, Parliament's computers, but if we as parliamentarians bring in our own computers, we do not have a place to plug them in and work effectively.

It is important to have a date when this facility will be available to us.

Secondly, on a matter of communication, under paragraph 21 of this resolution, I would like to draw the House's attention to the fact that we have on many occasions in these debates called for all Commission and Parliament offices in the Member States to work together within a European House framework by 1 January 2000.

As we have now gone past that date and there are still one or two Member States, in particular my own, where Parliament and the Commission have different offices and where in terms of financing Parliament's office well over 70% of the expenditure goes on bricks and salaries, it does not leave much for communications.

The sooner we can make sure that the image of the European Union is reflected by one European House, the better it will be.

The last point refers to the question of the implications for enlargement.

I would like to support what our rapporteur has said that we cannot suddenly leap into beginning to authorise posts for preparing enlargement if a political decision has not yet been taken; all the more so, because in Parliament's estimates, as I have understood them, we have in front of us an assumption that we are going to have more languages as a result of enlargement.

Yet we have had no debate in this House to know how we are going to handle not a limited enlargement but an extensive enlargement following the Helsinki Summit late last year, with potentially 12 or 13 new countries, that is 27 - 28 countries with over 20 different languages.

How, Secretary-General, are we going to handle this if we do not have some thinking from the Administration as to where we are going to put them all?

Are we going to have rooms which we are going to have to adjust for over 20 languages so that in every room where there is a discussion in this Parliament every person has the right to use their own language?

We are aware that in the last Parliament a lot of work was done on this by Vice-President Cot.

His report was never released to Members.

We never saw it as a report on suggesting how the hub and spoke system should work - the relay system for interpretation - nor, indeed, did we really have any thinking about the freelancing possibilities with modern communications where we can dispatch a large amount of our translation material to people who are in the Member States, rather than recruiting a whole range of people to come and work in Luxembourg as fixed and permanent employees of Parliament.

Therefore, I strongly support the compromise which has been put forward by our rapporteur asking, by first reading, for the Secretary-General to come up with a strategy of how to handle the whole question of languages in Parliament and enlargement.

I suspect the Commission might wish to do that as well, because it is a problem which rightly, in this amendment, relates to interinstitutional matters.

I very much hope that the Socialist Group will change their mind, get their heads out of the sand and realise that this is the problem which we have to tackle and that it is better to do it now rather than later.

Mr President, let me also start by congratulating Mr Ferber on a comprehensive estimate of Parliament's revenue and expenditure.

I support the thrust of this report, which is in line with the policy of budgetary rigour, because the major challenges that this Chamber needs to address are greater accountability and transparency which will involve embracing institutional reform with vigour; secondly, the forthcoming enlargement of the Union and thirdly, a drive towards improving efficiency through effective budgetary control and better use of resources.

Our main priority has to be to explain to European citizens what we are doing, why we are doing it and how we are doing it.

We must win the confidence of the European taxpayer and we can only do this by improving accountability through simplifying - not mystifying - the work of Parliament, by reducing jargon, by improving the process of approving legislation and improving the legislative machinery and by making a clear connection between what we do here and how it benefits the individual.

We are going a long way towards achieving this transparency through the introduction of activity-based budgeting and the proposal we have in this report to put appropriations for political parties in separate budget lines will contribute significantly to achieving this.

These virtues are all the more important as we move towards the challenge facing the EU at the moment of enlargement.

We in the Socialist Group strongly believe that the European Parliament should be giving every encouragement to candidate countries in their preparation to joint the EU.

I have the impression that there are those in this House who appear to be frustrating this process of enlargement by placing unnecessary obstacles in the way and often using spurious arguments to limit the preparation for enlargement: for example, the rejection of the proposal to fill the 35 vacant posts in the language reserve between 2001 and 2002.

The reason given, and also outlined by my colleague Mr Elles, is that we believe that this will pre-empt discussions with accession states.

Do we seriously believe that this small step will influence all the institutions as to which countries are in the first tranche and which are in the second tranche?

Do we really believe that by committing less than half a per cent of Parliament's language budget the political decision will be made and taken out of our control?

I am somewhat confused and if I recall correctly, the rapporteur agreed previously and argued vigorously for setting up an interinstitutional recruitment agency in his last report.

What is the point of approving a joint operation whilst at the same time we are preventing any recruitment of people?

I strongly favour planning properly for enlargement because experience has shown that there is a long lead-in time for the training of interpreters and translators.

It is necessary if the admission of the new Member States into the Institution is to run smoothly from a language point of view.

Of course I agree that we should not at any stage prejudice political decisions which have to be taken at a later date.

On the other hand, we should avoid giving out discouraging messages to the applicant countries that are currently making great efforts to get themselves in shape to join the EU.

I reiterate that we should not pre-empt any political decisions to be taken on enlargement.

We need to plan and to be imaginative and to be creative as to how we prepare for enlargement because nothing will be more damaging to the EU if we make a bad job of enlargement.

What we also need to do is have a vigorous implementation of reform to prepare for enlargement.

Very recently the President of the European Court of Justice warned that it would be unable to cope with enlargement of the EU.

The average time that it takes for a case to be heard has risen from 17 months in 1988 to 23 months last year.

That is a very long wait.

What we need to do is to have reforms, not just in the areas of staffing and procedures, but we also need to have a new approach in terms of buildings policy.

It is vital that the preparations are made during the coming financial year to ensure that Parliament's buildings are able to accommodate new Member States of an enlarged EU.

It is also important for provision to be made to set up information offices in the countries which have applied to join the EU.

It is widely acknowledged that the systems that we have at the moment were set up for the EU when we only had 6 Members and they are creaking at the edges in terms of the Union of 15 Members.

How are they possibly going to be effective with 25 Members?

It is important that we plan and prepare.

I am a relatively new Member of Parliament and while I see a lot of good work going on in the committees, I am acutely aware that as a result of the new responsibilities in the Treaty of Amsterdam there is a need not just for individual support for Members but also scientific support for committees.

Since the Treaty of Amsterdam came into force Parliament's workload has increased very significantly and it is important that this is taken into account in this budget.

The Commission's Work Programme now incorporates a very large number of codecision procedures and these procedures have significantly increased our workload.

If we are to convince the people of the EU of the importance of the European Parliament's work and persuade them to take it more seriously, we need to improve our systems of working.

That is why I welcome the report's emphasis on the common statute for Members and assistants and I hope that we can adopt this as soon as possible.

I have been disappointed by some aspects of the report's focus.

It focuses too much on the minutiae of detail in sometimes preventing administrative changes in staffing and frustrating strategic vision.

I am concerned at the wisdom of putting 30% of the appropriation into the reserve for security services as the rapporteur proposes.

There is a contradiction in the rapporteur's argument.

He has always focused on outsourcing of Parliament's services.

Here we have an example of outsourcing that is not working.

Rather than reducing the budget we should be looking at how we improve security services, and the question we should be asking is: should we have our own security services or should we be retendering it rather than just reducing the budget?

I am also disappointed that the report ignores one of the biggest inefficiencies we have.

Members of the European Parliament are the only parliamentarians who have no say in the location of their seat.

A seat on three sites is the most incredible waste of time, money, travel and transport.

Surely, when we are looking at budgetary rigour we have the right to address this issue because until we do so the general public will be confused about what we are doing in so many places.

It also confuses the roles of the organisation.

Mr President, Mr Markus Ferber has produced an excellent report, on which I wish to congratulate him.

The Parliament Budget is essentially an administrative budget, since wage costs constitute the largest item of expenditure.

We are currently experiencing a significant period of change in administration, as we are aiming to introduce activity-based budgeting, to emphasise greater personal accountability and to improve the reallocation of resources.

This is why, last year, Parliament approved an appropriation of EUR 300 000 for this year' s budget for the investigation of the efficiency and improvement needs of parliamentary administration.

Mr President, this is why it is somewhat surprising that already at this early stage, i.e. before the investigation has even started, important decisions are being made on administrative development.

In the Budget, appropriations for wages are being increased by an enormous 12.2 %.

This increase is so huge that no other institution could even contemplate an increase of administrative costs of this magnitude.

Already, at this early stage, the intention is to spend this increase on the creation of 33 new posts and, apparently, 12 more will be created as a result of the amendment by the Bureau.

For the sake of comparison, I would like to refer to the 1995-1999 period, during which Parliament established a total of only 11 new official posts.

It is worthy of special mention that in this proposal, a new post is even being created for the Financial Control Department, despite the intention to abandon prior inspection altogether.

In addition, the Budget contains a significant number of new staff promotions.

Such being the case, I cannot agree with those who claim that a policy of budgetary discipline has been observed in the drafting of this Budget. On the contrary, this Budget is uncommonly slack, and this will make it difficult to gain the approval of the general public.

Mr President, it is necessary in this context to address the issue of the policy of the European Parliament in its capacity as an employer.

Administrative reform, activity-based budgeting and downward delegation of accountability require consultation with the staff.

Reallocation of resources is necessary, and consequently also reform of staffing regulations.

Thus it would have been proper to save for the future such tools and opportunities for negotiation, with which these reforms are supposed to be furthered, and to refrain from granting new benefits before there has even been an opportunity to negotiate comparable administrative reforms with the staff.

Mr President, I too would like to extend warm thanks to the rapporteur for his report and for facilitating open communication.

Mr Ferber' s report does not just contain political aspects but is in fact largely composed of administrative aspects. I will start by quoting and commenting on a number of political statements.

My group wholeheartedly agrees with the line taken in the report that the Council and Parliament should draft a statute in the short term and should do this in joint cooperation. They should compile a statute for the Members of the European Parliament, and, independently of that, a statute for the Member' s assistants.

We support this and hope that it can be brought to a conclusion during the course of this year.

The report also contains a political comment regarding the separate budget lines required for the parliamentary groups on the one hand and the European political parties on the other. We must avoid hidden subsidies for European political parties at all costs.

We all know that it will be some time before a statute is drawn up for the European political parties and I welcome the fact that, in the meantime, the Secretary-General has been asked to establish transparency in the use of appropriations by the parliamentary groups and the political parties.

Quite apart from this, the report also covers many administrative aspects.

For example, we have been asked to pass judgement on the fact that the Directorate for Committees and Delegations must comprise five A posts, two B posts and one C post, and that one A post and two B posts must be added to the Directorate-General for Personnel. It is not because I am new, I think, that I have great difficulty in passing judgement on this.

In my opinion, it is mainly up to a manager to take responsibility for the precise detail of personnel policy. It is also very difficult for the groups if it is decided in the plenary how many additional posts are to be created within the political groups.

Surely, a great deal depends on the organisation of your group and maybe not every group wants to work in exactly the same way.

I think that we should really re-think the system. I understand that during the reform of Parliament, consideration will also be given to allowing groups to take responsibility for their own affairs and I wholeheartedly support this.

I would also like to comment briefly on the support which has been requested for the parliamentarians.

We have agreed that a study will be carried out which will also be linked in with a study commissioned by Mr Rothley into what exactly it is that the parliamentarians need in the way of support for their work.

I struggle somewhat with the fact that we are running ahead of this study' s conclusions because we do not give our verdict on the Bureau' s conclusion in Mr Ferber' s report. The Bureau concludes that expenses for assistants should be increased by 20%.

In failing to pass judgement on this, we are giving the impression that we have accepted it. I am not against this increase, in principle.

What I do object to, however, is running ahead of the report and I am also opposed to it because I am sure that in September, it will transpire that we will need to prioritise various issues. For example, the rent we pay for the buildings may increase.

We will need to decide whether we want to inject more funding into other institutions in preparation for enlargement. We will no doubt return to these points of criticism in September when we will have the precise figures in front of us.

As such, it is not really a criticism but I do object to running ahead of a decision.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, we are discussing a report on the European Parliament, and I am astonished first of all not to see one of Mrs Stauner' s letters appended to this document because, as you know, she likes to get involved in our business even though her own activities are concerned with something completely different.

Perhaps this is due to the fact that the rapporteur is a member of her own group and, for once, she is therefore confining herself to making observations rather than sending a letter.

I find this rather strange, but perhaps she has not yet said her last word.

What I want to say is quite simply this: the situation is nonetheless rather surprising. On the one hand, we have engaged in a policy of rigour resulting in all our budgets and discharges being obstructed by a Parliament that is rigorous to the extent of obstructing discharge to the Commission, and even obstructing discharge to the European Parliament itself, out of fear of problems, lack of endorsement or money wasting attributable to the duties of officials who are required to shuttle back and forth between Luxembourg and Brussels, costing the taxpayer a fortune.

Yet on the other hand, in the Ferber report, Members of Parliament are awarding themselves fortunes.

We are awarding ourselves a second computer, claiming that one is not enough.

We are awarding ourselves a 20% pay rise from a zero-growth budget.

We are awarding ourselves a 20% increase to the budget heading for funding for our assistants because we are more than anything afraid that the rules will stipulate that this contract will have to be accompanied by a statute which would specifically require welfare contributions to be paid, and so, as insurance against the worst case scenario, we are increasing this line by 20%.

After checking up, I have not found a single budget item in the Community, whether in the field of humanitarian aid, research, or agricultural expenditure where there are plans for an increase.

Moreover, generally speaking, the objective is to reduce the budget.

Within the European Parliament a second computer is being awarded, 20% additional expenses and, as the Court of Auditors was particularly tough on the political groups, a paragraph is included, which, I quote, "Underlines emphatically the increased workload and the particular responsibilities of the political groups."

This paragraph does Parliament no credit.

If we adopt an attitude, we cannot express any indignation at waste while at the same time putting forward a budget of this type.

On behalf of the radicals in this House, I must inform you that I shall be voting against Mr Ferber' s report.

Mr President, Commissioner, I am sorry that my good friend, Mr Dell'Alba, is not in agreement with the draft budget by Mr Ferber.

We are in agreement and we are very happy.

I believe that the rapporteur, in drawing up this draft budget for 2001, has been rigorous, has made optimum use of resources and has, at the same time, been imaginative and looked to the future.

Ultimately, we are talking about a European Parliament for the 21st century, when we will have to face three fundamental challenges. We will have to respond to the MEPs' new obligations, as laid down in the Treaty of Amsterdam, incorporate new technologies into our work and react immediately to the huge administrative, organisational and political obligations presented by enlargement of the European Union.

These three challenges faced by the European Parliament should be set in a context of great budgetary rigour and complete transparency in the use of public funds.

We must consider - and the rapporteur has done this - what kind of Parliament we want in the future.

Do we want a more administrative and bureaucratic Parliament or do we want a more political one? Do we want a European Parliament that is centralised or do we want one which is compatible with a European Union which is becoming increasingly federalised but at the same time more subject to subsidiarity and decentralisation?

I believe - and I agree with him on this - that the rapporteur wants a Parliament that treats the MEPs' political work, both in Strasbourg and in Brussels, as well as in their individual political constituencies, as a priority.

In this case it is necessary, as he says, for there to be new information points, new IT resources and new staff - if necessary - to help MEPs carry out their bureaucratic tasks.

I hope that in September new appropriations will be provided for these lines.

I am very glad that Mr Ferber has reacted to the report of the Court of Auditors on the funding of the political groups.

An independent budget line will allow us to present a clearer and more transparent public image until we finally have a statute for the European political parties.

Let us not forget that these parties are the cornerstone of European democracy and there must be no doubts as to whether they are being funded in the correct manner.

We fully agree with the rapporteur' s view concerning the linguistic staff necessary for enlargement.

We must initiate the preparatory administrative measures.

Six new countries - with at least five new languages - in 2004 means that we will have to make a great effort to adapt.

In order to fill these vacancies, we will need to know the exact order in which the candidate countries will join the Union, and that is something that cannot happen now or in this budget.

We therefore support all Mr Ferber' s amendments.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I should like to start by expressly welcoming Mr Ferber' s report in its broadest outlines.

We have enjoyed extremely positive collaboration over recent weeks and months, cooperation marked by the fact that we expressed our opinions in no uncertain terms on the points where we diverged widely, but when you can reach a common line, then that is the path you should take.

The challenge which faces us has been described. One can in fact do no more than repeat it.

In the wake of Amsterdam - and I say this now in anticipation of what is yet to come in relation to this Parliament - we must reconcile the powers which Parliament now has with its potential, because at present they do not stand in a very balanced ratio.

We must ensure that we can achieve equality in arms with the other legislative authority, namely the Council, both in respect of the scientific service and scientific research.

We cannot allow the potential of this democratic and directly-elected Parliament to lag behind what the Council can do.

If we take our work seriously, if we take ourselves seriously, we must operate under the same conditions so that we really can stand up for ourselves.

There is no point in the President of our Parliament just putting her mark at the bottom of the page.

That is not enough; it is the work beforehand which is crucial and it needs to be carried out seriously and it needs to be carried out well.

In this respect it is both right and important - and I expressly disagree with Mr Dell'Alba here - that we prepare ourselves properly.

Nor can there be any question of exorbitant cost increases now.

Mr Dell'Alba knows full well that, thanks to a clever buildings policy - let there be no mistake about that - we have been able to release considerable funds over recent years.

Having scrimped and saved this money ourselves, we then need to use it to good purpose.

To good purpose means improving the potential and capabilities of this Parliament.

We are still within the 20% margin which we set ourselves and we are keeping to it.

At no point do we go over Parliament' s 20% share of administrative costs.

I think that shows that our approach is very serious here and we do not want to promise any cloud cuckoo land.

Another challenge before us - admittedly we have been pushed into action here by official discussions in various quarters - is the need to bring some transparency into this Parliament.

We shall accept this responsibility and take up this challenge.

Not because we are afraid of being forced to do so. No, we want the public to know that we have nothing to hide here.

We are endeavouring to create a serious basis for what we do here, i.e. financing for the groups, and we want a set of rules so that the European political parties and party organisations can raise funds.

You cannot call for this sort of development at European level without financing the basis commensurately, that is quite right.

The basis must be clearly visible so that our citizens know what money is going where.

We shall do everything we can to make progress on this point and to bring more transparency into the process, so that everyone can see what money is going where and can judge if it is appropriate or unsuitable and criticism can then be levied where criticism is needed.

However, we must head off criticism on procedural grounds or because we have accommodated certain sums under various budget headings.

Transparency is needed here and, as we said last year during the budget debates, we have our work cut out here.

Allow me to comment now on the question of enlargement, because that is the only point on which we disagree with Mr Ferber and, above all, with our colleagues in the PPE group.

What worries me here is that Mr Stoiber' s visit to your group last week had a greater impact than we all feared.

My next comment is addressed to my honourable friend, Mr Pöttering: it was you who said at a European Union conference "onwards and upwards" , and that enlargement should be speeded up for political reasons, because we cannot afford to put it on the back burner.

But, when we are specifically called upon to move forwards, we should do so decisively.

I know that the issue of when and how enlargement should take place can be the stuff of first-rate political debate, a debate which could set the axe at the very roots and I call for extreme caution here.

As far as specific preparations are concerned, we need, for example, to make preparations for more buildings.

And if you do not start looking for buildings, for example in the candidate countries, until things are so far down the road, you will be faced with prices which make your hair turn grey.

So we need to get our act together and make preparations which allow for sound financial management.

As far as preparing for new languages is concerned, if you read the Cot report, called for by the honourable Member of your group, Mr Elles, you will see that we shall have an additional 460 language combinations in the future.

According to one estimate, this will mean another 500 translators and interpreters.

Do you expect us to believe that you are suddenly going to jump up like a jack in the box with a list of people who are highly specialised in Estonian, Latvian, Czech, in all these new languages which we shall have?

No, preparations need to be made now.

And in order to avoid falling into the trap, as Mr Ferber rightly explained, of taking administrative decisions which anticipate political developments, we must, of course, ensure during the course of the year that we have a precise discussion on the distribution of these posts between the various languages.

We shall support the release of the Cot report - that is one part of Mr Elles' motion.

We are in favour of discussing this during the course of the year, but we are expressly against saying as of now that we refuse to fill the 35 posts.

That would be frivolous and would send completely the wrong signal to the Member States and to the people who hope to become an integral part of the Union.

Mr President, allow me to begin by thanking the rapporteur, Mr Ferber, for the good work he has done.

There is a lot in this report which has been well thought-out and which it is very easy indeed to support.

I want to talk about an issue which, in the long term, will be very important for Parliament and for the EU as a whole and which many Members have already touched upon here today, namely the language question.

Rarely perhaps is the linguistic diversity of Europe seen so incredibly clearly as in a debate in this Chamber in which eleven different languages are being interpreted between.

Naturally, this is expensive and time-consuming.

Yet it has been assumed without question, throughout the history of the EU, that whoever is present here should be able, if at all possible, to speak their own language.

A good deal in the report under discussion is based on the assumption that the EU will be enlarged by six new Member States in 2004.

What is more, that may be an underestimate.

A few days ago, the Commission said it was its own objective to be able to welcome ten new Member States by the year 2005.

I am among those for whom the greatest challenge for the EU is an enlargement whose ultimate goal is the reunification of a Europe which has always been divided by artificial borders.

I nonetheless believe that it is more realistic to proceed on the basis of the somewhat lower figure quoted in the report by the Committee on Budgets.

Even that figure is awfully large, bearing in mind the number of new languages involved.

Proceeding on the basis that there will be "5+1 countries" in the first round of negotiations - a lot can obviously happen during the next few years, but these six countries nonetheless have a two-year head start in terms of the negotiations - this means that five new official languages will be added to the eleven we already have at present.

There is no question of these newly welcomed countries and their languages being treated any differently from the way in which the existing Member States are treated.

It must equally go without saying that Hungarian, Polish or Estonian Members of this Parliament should be able to speak their own languages, just as we existing Members are entitled to speak ours.

Nor can we put ourselves in a situation whereby a country with access to trained interpreters and translators can become a Member State of the EU, while another country which does not have professionals of these kinds cannot.

That is precisely why it is so important that the issue is highlighted right now. That is what the rapporteur is doing, and I think it is excellent.

We must not, in a few years' time, find ourselves in a situation in which the issue has still not been resolved.

We should also be clear about the fact that things are happening very quickly right now.

We are dealing with countries which are developing very rapidly, which means that we too must act quickly in order to have settled the language question by the time these countries join the Union.

Mr President, I congratulate Mr Ferber on his report.

These types of reports are never easy and he has done a good job.

My only criticism is that Amendments Nos 4 and 5 should have been tabled in someone else's name for the PPE Group.

By saying that I am being consistent: I said the same to Mrs Müller in the Green Group when she did that.

Parliament demands that the Commission and the other institutions are prudent with taxpayers' money, and we think the same should apply to the European Parliament.

As chairman of this committee, I have discovered that your loyalties are spread very wide.

I have a loyalty to the committee, and when the committee takes a decision I feel duty-bound to defend that decision.

I have a loyalty to the rapporteur, and that is why I have made the comments before because the rapporteur should reflect the opinions of the committee.

I also have a loyalty to my political group which has given me this speaking time.

This sometimes leaves me bereft of my own loyalties to myself and what I want to say.

I was somewhat sympathetic to what Mr Dell'Alba was saying because we have to be careful of criticising everybody else if, at the same time, we are giving the impression that we are ignoring that prudency and just doing what we want to do.

I am not saying that we have done that.

However, if that is the impression we are going to give, we have to be very careful and realise the consequences.

Having said that, the Ferber report has tried to balance the needs of Parliament coming into a new millennium - new needs, enlargement on the horizon - and to make it function effectively.

Not all the decisions will be taken when we vote this report through.

The first reading will be time when the final decisions are taken, and cognisance has been taken of that.

When they see a budget of EUR 965m, the newspapers will easily deduce that is over EUR 1.5m per Member.

The British newspapers will be full of GBP 1m per MEP - that is what they cost!

However, we are trying to reduce those costs, especially on buildings.

If people would look at what is being done with the buildings: we are trying to reduce the payments over the shortest possible time, thereby reducing the total burden on Parliament's budget.

One only has to look at paragraphs 15 to 18 to see how serious we are about the buildings policy.

The policy of ramassage has been a great success for this Parliament.

What we have done with the Belliard building may not be ideal but at least it is a step in the right direction, and it is now off our backs.

Finally, one of the great problems in our institution is that we have no statute for Members, assistants or political parties.

What is being proposed is to try to make some headway towards resolving those factors.

- (PT) Mr President, the proposals put forward in the report that we are now considering interpret - or should interpret - the will of the European Parliament to prepare itself to meet the challenges facing the European Union.

It has to be this way, as we have been through a tricky time, and there are permanent tensions and glaring contradictions.

It seems that we expect everything and, at the same time, we expect nothing at all from the European Union' s priorities, as we can see from the level of budgetary transposition - or lack thereof.

It is our ability to take advantage of something that could potentially transform tensions and to reduce the amount of contradictions which will make the difference between the stagnation and the consequent decline of the project and the dynamism that its implementation requires.

Have the competences of the European Parliament increased substantially with the entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam and the consequent extension of the codecision procedure to further areas of policy, for example?

If that is the case, we would have to provide Members of the House with a greater ability to carry out their mandate, more and better information and we would have to ensure that the political groups are more accountable and that the staff of the European Parliament is more efficient.

Does enlargement require subtle changes in the membership and functioning of this Parliament?

If it does, then we need to prepare for them, anticipate the challenges and how to respond to them and not fall into a situation of 'wait and see' , which would leave us trailing in the wake of events that we can neither prevent nor influence.

This applies to the European Union as a whole.

We are at a turning point and, now that we have reached this point, nothing will be the same as it was before and things will not remain as they are now.

Now that economic and monetary union has been achieved, the euro cannot be a point of arrival but a starting point, which, in time, will bring about and require further changes.

Now that the process of enlargement has been launched, fundamental changes are required as well as renewed ambition.

The need to make the economic sphere correspond to the political sphere is becoming increasingly clear.

We are swinging between deepening and dilution, solidarity and selfishness, decisiveness and delay, coherence and contradiction and convergence and divergence.

By increasing the influence of core principles, amongst which I would highlight subsidiarity and social and economic cohesion, we will be able to launch and see through new initiatives.

I congratulate Mr Ferber on the care he has taken over this work.

Mr President, as other colleagues have said, dealing with Amsterdam and preparing for enlargement are major challenges for this institution.

As far as I am concerned - and we should be very clear about this - new challenges require new resources.

As the rapporteur has indicated, you start by looking at existing resources and see where staff and resources which are under-utilised or no longer appropriate can be transferred.

Once that has been done, in the new situation in which the European Parliament finds itself, there is no alternative but to expand our budget.

I hear what Mr Wynn, the chairman of the committee, has said about prudence.

Prudence is in danger of becoming a false goddess: if we put too much emphasis on prudence it will be at the expense of the efficiency and the effectiveness of this Institution.

There is a delicate balance to be struck, and I know that in his report the rapporteur has striven towards it.

I broadly welcome Mr Ferber's report.

However, there are three fronts to which Parliament needs to pay more attention between now and September.

The first, as other colleagues have mentioned, is the issue of languages.

I had the honour of sitting on Mr Cot's working group on multilingualism.

Frankly, if this institution wishes to continue to practise multilingualism - and perhaps that is a debate we should have - there is no alternative but to start recruiting now.

If we leave it any longer, once we start enlargement we will not be in a position to continue multilingualism.

The decision will be taken for us.

We were almost in that position with Finnish at the last enlargement.

As Members will notice, the Finnish interpreters do a good job speaking English and other languages because we could not recruit Finnish-speaking English interpreters.

We shall find ourselves in that position again come the next enlargement unless we take hard decisions now.

So I want Parliament to rethink the 35 language posts.

The second area where we still have much to do as an Institution is informatics.

We have come a long way, but there are further benefits to be obtained from informatics.

In particular the President of the Bureau is looking at how to reach a position where every Member has a portable computer with access to the European Parliament's computer system so that, no matter where they are in the world, they can get their own committee reports, agendas and so on.

That does not require a massive increase in investment but it does require new money - an increase in Parliament's resources.

Finally, again, something I have heard you, Mr President, talk about: the issue of legal advice.

The new Amsterdam situation means that when we pass amendments and resolutions in this Chamber we have to be more aware of the legal consequences as well as the political consequences of what we are deciding.

We need to enhance the legal advice we have as a Parliament to support us through the conciliation and other procedures.

Finally, I should like to make it clear that I am not asking Parliament to spend massive amounts of new money.

However, to spend one or two per cent more in order to ensure that we remain effective is worth it, and we should look at prudence in the context of the wider demands of this Parliament.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, Mr Ferber, I should like to make a point of congratulating you on your report.

Of course it is not the Commission' s job to evaluate individual proposals, but I would like to welcome the fact that Parliament is endeavouring to ensure that, in future, the buildings policy will reduce the burden on the budget from interest payments.

Of course, I also welcome, from the point of view of interinstitutional relations, that your proposal has remained, as it were, within category 5 of the agreement.

The agreement makes provision here for this joint estimate of personnel and administrative costs to be distributed between the institutions on the basis of a specific ratio and you have based your proposals on that distribution.

I think that again shows that many aspects of the financial perspectives facilitate work and planning, especially where firm agreements are concluded between the institutions.

Above all, however, what is important is that you have paid a great deal of attention in your report to the question of enlargement and staff policy in the translating and interpreting sector and, of course, the question of what measures are taken here is a highly political one.

More importantly, preparations do, of course, have to be made and you have pointed out - even though the question looks somewhat different from the point of view of the individual institutions - that it should be a matter of interinstitutional concern to address the subject and find a solution.

In this respect, congratulations once again on your report, especially on the fact that the report on the Budget 2001 looks beyond the Budget 2001.

The vote will take place on Thursday at 12 noon.

Presentation by Commission of preliminary draft budget for 2001

The next item is the presentation by the Commission of the preliminary draft budget for 2001.

(DE) Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, in February, the Commission debated the priorities for the European budget for next year and had the opportunity to discuss these priorities in detail with the European Parliament both here in plenary and, more importantly, in the Committee on Budgets and in the various trialogues between the Commission, the European Parliament and the Council which have taken place since.

The Commission has used this debate as the basis for its preliminary draft budget for 2001, which it now has pleasure in presenting to you, as adopted by the Commission.

As it is the first preliminary draft budget which I have presented, allow me to comment on the procedure and the timing.

I think it makes a great deal of sense to debate priorities intensively first, before getting down to specific numbers. More importantly, I think it is most helpful to present the preliminary draft budget so early, thereby allowing time for intensive discussion.

Now to the budget proper: as with every national budget, most of the figures in the European budget for a given year are determined by contracts, by previous decisions in past years and by legal bases in past years.

This is particularly true of agricultural expenditure in the area of the organisation of the markets, the largest item in the budget, including in the Budget 2001, and of the Structural Funds and multiannual programmes, be they in research, youth measures or foreign policy.

Despite the fact that figures are determined by previous years, the Budget 2001 also sets clear political priorities and, following discussions over recent months, I think I can say that the priorities in the Commission' s preliminary draft budget tally to a large extent with Parliament' s priorities.

Take, for example, the priority under the second pillar of agricultural policy; the highest rate of increase in the Commission' s preliminary draft budget is for promoting the development of rural areas and I think that this in fact highlights that the Commission considers that we need to focus on the second pillar of agricultural policy.

Secondly, economic policy prioritises the need to develop and promote Europe as a knowledge-based society, which is why the Commission' s preliminary draft budget has set a very large plus against research and a new edition of the programme to promote small- and medium-sized enterprises and, more importantly, contains a proposal to combine them with the promotion of technology, which was also a matter of concern to the rapporteur, Mrs Haug.

Access to new technologies is not very well developed in small- and medium-sized enterprises.

Of course, with the economic structure which we would like to have and which is strongly supported by small- and medium-sized enterprises, and which we want to use to push Europe forward, it is necessary and it makes sense for Europe' s development in information and communications technologies to combine these two aspects.

The preliminary draft budget also contains a new focus on foreign policy.

We have already had the opportunity to debate this in great detail, especially assistance in the Balkans.

Another priority which I should like to mention is the need for budgetary rigour in the European budget and the Commission' s preliminary draft budget is in line with this objective.

So now a few figures on the overall budget.

Without agricultural expenditure, the preliminary draft budget makes provision for an increase in commitment appropriations, i.e. the financial commitments which can be entered into, of 1% in comparison with last year.

I think that this figure clearly illustrates that the preliminary draft budget is in keeping with the overall policy of budgetary rigour, and that the rate of increase in payments as a whole, without agricultural expenditure, is 3%.

I should point out that the average growth forecast for the budgets of the Member States is 3.1%.

I stress this because it will certainly play an important part during the debate with the Council.

However, we have included a considerable increase in agricultural expenditure in the preliminary draft budget, namely 7.6% or, in absolute terms, a total of EUR 3.12 billion.

This is mainly as a result of the resolutions passed by the Heads of State and Government at the Berlin Summit last year and these agreed financial perspectives form part of the interinstitutional agreement concluded last year between the Parliament, the Council and the Commission.

I should point out that this figure for agricultural policy actually makes provision for the draft budget for agricultural policy to remain under the ceiling decided in Berlin because the Commission proposal includes shifting EUR 300 million from the agricultural budget to foreign policy, yet still there is such a high rate of growth for agricultural policy.

To sum up, the preliminary draft figures as a whole make provision overall for a rate of increase of 3.9% in commitment appropriations and 5% in payments.

The rate of growth of payments is higher because we have a large backlog of payment commitments and the Commission currently takes the view that this should not get any bigger; on the contrary it should be reduced, which is precisely why the rate of growth for payments needs to be higher.

What does this mean for the European state quota?

By that I mean what proportion of the total gross national product of the European Community is absorbed by the European Union budget?

In other words, how high is the European state quota based on the strong growth in gross national product expected in the countries of the European Community next year?

There are very positive growth prospects here.

Is the change in the ratio of gross national product to budget from 1.11% in the year 2000 to 1.07% in the year 2001 a step backwards?

I highlight this - we also have extremely intensive debates in the Member States on state quotas, which are between 40 and 50% - in order to illustrate the fact that the European budget accounts for 1.07% of the total gross national product.

This clearly illustrates that the budget of the European Union is worth its weight in gold.

The European Union acquired a new remit following the war in Kosovo and the resolutions on the Stability Pact in the Balkans.

The Council stressed the importance of this remit once again in Lisbon.

Now we have to provide the funds and so the Commission has presented a proposal in its preliminary draft budget which reflects the importance of this remit. EUR 815 million have been earmarked for aid to the western Balkans in 2001, following on from EUR 540 million this year.

This is the aid which has been earmarked in order to reconstruct the civil society, i.e. it does not, for example, include expenditure by Member States for KFOR troops.

Is expenditure of EUR 815 million for the entire region too high an estimate?

We have already discussed whether these countries are able to absorb this figure in the trialogue debate with the Council.

I think that, to an extent, this debate is somewhat cynical because requirements are, of course, extremely high. But of course the political decision as to how much aid the budgetary authority wishes to provide from the European budget rests with the budgetary authority alone.

I should point out that the proposal for Serbia for the year 2001 makes provision for a fixed sum of 40 million.

The Commission has proposed that, if the political situation changes in Serbia, additional funds will be provided from the flexibility reserve.

But I should like to stress once again that the Commission has made provision for a very large sum for Serbia in its proposed amendment to the financial plan for the period up to 2006, and I think that we should send a signal to Serbia, to the political opposition in Serbia, that the European Union is prepared to come up with large sums of aid if and when political democracy becomes a reality.

This is the Commission' s first budget in the form of activity-based budgeting; in other words, all budget expenditure has been allocated to political areas.

Now we can see at a glance how much is being spent on which political areas.

I think that it is an important step in the direction of greater transparency and stronger public political debate to stop talking in categories, because apart from us here in this House and a handful of officials in the Member States and a few well-informed journalists, who knows what internal policies are, for example?

I think that ABB, i.e. this proposal, this new structure, will really make public political debate much easier. What is the European Union spending its money on?

This is therefore a very important step, not a technical step, but an important political step.

I should briefly like to point out that the Commission proposal includes a proposal for a letter of amendment on the Budget 2000.

More importantly, it also includes a whole series of technical adjustments and, in particular, the consequences of the annual accounts for 1999 for the European Union budget.

The European Union budget for 1999 closed with a large surplus of EUR 3.2 billion.

In other words, EUR 3.2 billion will be refunded to the Member States. These refunds will be offset against the contributions for this year.

Of course, all Member States will be included and the money will be refunded in the ratio to which the Member States finance the European Union budget.

There was some confusion in relation to Great Britain in the report.

I should point out that the refund was offset but a different figure was obtained because of the rate of the euro to the pound.

Great Britain' s contribution in euros appears to be higher than in the plan, but if the calculation is carried out in pounds, it appears to be different.

So we need to take a good look at the question of exchange rates in the European budget.

I have highlighted this balance in order to illustrate - and this very point was raised in your debate on the European Parliament budget - that the term budgetary rigour is certainly not a concept which is foreign to the European budget and it is being applied.

The next step is for the Council to examine the Commission' s preliminary draft budget and to draw up a draft budget for the year 2001.

Of course this will be followed by intensive debate.

I trust that the rest of the procedure will be marked by less harping on about principles and more joint endeavour to use the funds in the European budget efficiently and for the benefit and in support of the objectives of the European Union.

Mr President, Commissioner, thank you for your presentation. I should like to pick up straight away on your closing words.

I do not think that we should harp on about principles during our discussion of the Budget 2001.

But I also think that this is a call directed at the Council rather than a call directed at us, notwithstanding what has been submitted to us parliamentarians so far from the preliminary draft budget for evaluation.

This leads me to say that, first and foremost, the Commission has taken account of the Council' s wish that it present as economical a budget as possible.

You, yourself, said just now that the Budget 2001 is only 1% higher than the Budget 2000 without agricultural expenditure and we all know that agricultural expenditure accounts for a huge part of our budget.

To then talk of rigorous financial management to us alone is, of course, completely misplaced, especially as we here in Parliament are in favour of economical financial management.

The debate and the budgets which we have voted in the past demonstrate this and that is the way it should stay.

Allow me to remind the House: agricultural expenditure for the organisation of the markets is to rise by 7.6%.

Expenditure on rural development - and you stressed that we of course set great store by rural development - is to rise by 10.1%.

On the face of it, these relative figures alone, i.e. the percentages, are highly satisfactory.

But we all know that market expenditure in the current budget is over eight times higher than expenditure on rural development and that market expenditure in the next budget will be over nine times higher than expenditure on rural development.

This may take account of the wishes of the Council and of Council' s decisions, but it does not take quite such good account of the wishes of Parliament.

It is through Category 3, which encompasses all our priorities - not only Category 3, Category 4 also of course - but it is mainly through internal policies that all citizens perceive the European Union.

When you see that the budget has been set at around EUR 6.13 billion and then you compare that with market expenditure, then you see that market expenditure is six times higher than the whole of Category 3.

Knowing that four-fifths of all expenditure is tied in with multiannual programmes, and that, of course, 80% of all these multiannual programmes are decided under the codecision procedure, then the 1.4% increase proposed by the Commission is purely and simply the effect of the increase in research expenditure.

Nevertheless, you want to increase this expenditure by 8% and research expenditure accounts for over 60% of Category 3.

I know that the Commission is endeavouring to take account in the budget of the priorities it has accepted, namely creating a knowledge-based society and improving the quality of life of our citizens.

So far so good. We can support that.

But what about Parliament' s priorities?

We discussed our priorities well in advance both among ourselves and with the Commission, and we adopted our guidelines well in advance, including for Category 3.

You have just picked out a few points but when we see that education and youth policy are to rise by 1.2% then we must say - looking at the entire heading - that that is because next year is the European Year of Languages and the expenditure for it will rise by 275%.

That is perfectly normal and we have supported that.

If you look at the Culture and Audiovisual Media heading, there is a 2.7% increase.

I would have expected it to be higher.

Information and communications have risen by 4%.

But what about social dialogue and employment - down 4.7%.

What about energy policy, which we have fought for tooth and nail time and again?

You have cut it by 8.2% and you have cut environmental policy by a hefty 28.2%.

To my mind, the preliminary draft budget, as it now stands, takes no account of Parliament' s priorities.

Mrs Schreyer, what I personally hold dear to my heart, namely innovation and supporting small and medium-sized enterprises - yes, you have put a figure in the budget for this, but you have cut what we still had in the last budget by nearly 70%.

We urgently need to discuss this so that the budget also clearly sets out our priorities.

I have just this to say about Category 4: I think it is asking for trouble to support Serbia with such a small amount in 2001 and, at the same time, to say that once Serbia has democratised we can again use our flexibility instrument.

And one last comment which cuts across both Categories 3 and 4: what about the timetable on the legal framework for the offices for technical and administrative support or transformation promised by you and Commissioner Kinnock?

You wrote to us last December saying that a proposal would be submitted in the middle of April.

We are all dying to see it.

It is now the middle of May and we hope that it will make an appearance shortly because it is also important for our budgetary procedure.

Remember that you will have many months ahead to discuss this matter and to speak at length.

Furthermore, this is simply a dream on the part of the Commission.

The serious discussion will begin in July with the Council' s draft.

Mr President, Mrs Haug attended the Detlev Samland school of speaking to the clock and just carried straight on, as Detlev always used to.

Though we are talking about a PDB for the year 2001, it is somewhat difficult not to link it to the revision of the Financial Perspective.

I know we should not do so, but there is that link between the two which makes me want to comment on both.

For the Commission proposals to be successful three factors will be crucial.

The first is the assessment of needs for the western Balkans.

In a couple of weeks' time, Parliament will send an ad hoc delegation to Kosovo to try and make an assessment.

We will need to opt for the Commission proposal of EUR 5.5 billion in total or move towards the Council which is proposing a somewhat lower figure.

The second factor will be Parliament's attitude to redeployment, especially in Category IV, not just for 2001 but for the whole of the Financial Perspective.

That is why I say they have to be linked.

I will give you an example.

One area of great interest for me - I make no secret of it - is South Africa.

The proposal to take EUR 2 million per year away from South Africa for six years may not seem much.

But EUR 12 million is a lot of money for the projects in South Africa.

I would not be happy with that and I am sure other people in other areas of interest in Category IV would adopt a similar attitude.

Then we have Parliament's attitude towards redeployment in Category I. Similarly, we have to consider our approach to the use of the flexibility instrument if it was invoked for Serbia, as you suggest.

We have to bear in mind what the Interinstitutional Agreement says about a rule not being used for the same things in consecutive years.

Once again that would be a challenge for Parliament.

The third factor, and probably the most important one, is the attitude of the Council.

If they reject what you are proposing, especially as far as the revision goes, the question remains: what will you do next?

I know we have a trialogue and a conciliation before their first reading but it is a problem we have to resolve before the Council's first reading.

What happens if the Council is adamant and rejects the Commission's proposals?

Mrs Schreyer, you are something of a juggler and an illusionist at the same time, with the proposals that have been made.

You have to keep several balls in the air and, at the same time, because of what is proposed after 2003, you have to make more appear.

One of the great mysteries in your proposals on the revision is where the money will come from after 2003.

But that is not for next year.

In the meantime we await developments on those three factors.

Hopefully, at the end of this process, we will get a satisfactory outcome.

Protecting the Communities' financial interests and the fight against fraud

The next item is the report (A5-0116/2000) by Mr Bösch, on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control, on the 1998 annual report by the European Commission on protecting the Communities' financial interests and the fight against fraud.

Mr Dell'Alba has the floor on a point of order.

Allow me to remind the honourable Members by quickly reading Rule 143(1) out loud: "At the beginning of the debate on a specific item on the agenda, its inadmissibility may be moved.

Such a motion shall be put to the vote immediately."

According to the Rules of Procedure, one person may speak for and one person against the motion, after which it is put to the vote immediately without further debate.

Mrs Theato, are you speaking against Mr Dell'Alba' s motion?

Mr President, I am somewhat surprised because this report was duly and unanimously adopted by the Committee on Budgetary Control.

I would have expected such matters to be clarified in committee, rather than here in plenary.

The report has been available for some time and I therefore see no reason why we cannot debate and vote on it.

Secondly, I would be obliged if Mr Dell'Alba could tell me what he means by saying that I have blocked documents for weeks.

I fail to understand Mr Dell'Alba' s choice of words and assertion and I would welcome an explanation.

As no one wishes to speak for the motion, the vote shall now take place.

Mr President, allow me to start with a few comments on the judgement of the Court of First Instance of 2 May on the rights and duties of the members of this House vis-à-vis OLAF.

I welcome this judgement. It clarifies that, as elected representatives of the people, we may rightly claim a special status and that, in the event of doubt, protecting our independence takes precedence.

That was my position from the outset, incidentally.

That was why, during negotiations with the Commission and the Council, we made all the sensitive passages in the OLAF regulation subject to the Protocol on Privileges and Immunities.

That was why we suggested last autumn in the Committee on Budgetary Control that the provisions for members should be kept separate from the provisions for officials.

Unfortunately, the Committee on Constitutional Affairs did not subscribe to this view.

I said from the outset that members' offices were off limits for OLAF.

Obviously, the Commission' s legal service took a different view.

Now it has been taught a lesson by the Court.

However, the court judgement has put us in a position of inequality, because only the plaintiff can cite this judgement.

This state of affairs may last for a ridiculous amount of time, perhaps until a judgement is returned on the main issue, which may not be for two years.

I have therefore taken recourse to Rule 181 of the Rules of Procedure and proposed an amendment to the Rules of Procedure.

The text which I have proposed is in line with the original proposal of the Committee on Budgetary Control.

It keeps to the letter of the interinstitutional agreement with the Commission and the Council and takes full account of the stipulations of the Court of First Instance.

I urge you to support this initiative to amend the Rules of Procedure.

It would allow the matter to be clarified as quickly as possible and, I think, would even allow the members who took recourse to the Court to withdraw their action.

If the proposed amendment to the Rules of Procedure is implemented, their action would, as a matter of course, be pointless anyway.

This too is perfectly clear from the Court' s judgement.

Parliament' s internal decision was out of order, but the Parliament and Council regulation of 25 May 1999 on the work of OLAF is here to stay and is not open to question.

This is why I fail to comprehend why a number of proposed amendments to my report claim that the Court' s judgement has strengthened the position of the European Investment Bank and the European Central Bank in their opposition to the regulation.

It is true that both banks maintain that the Parliament and Council regulation cannot under any circumstances be applied to them because this would encroach upon their independence.

I totally fail to understand that; we have no intention of interfering in the banks' work.

What we do want is to guarantee that they have a minimum degree of protection against fraud, or do they want us to end up using private detectives to carry out this work?

The European Court of Justice and the Court of Auditors have duly implemented the provisions of the OLAF regulation in corresponding internal decisions.

They certainly would not have done so if they had felt that their independence was being jeopardised.

Neither bank has a plausible explanation as to why they do not accept what the independent judges of the European Court of Justice have accepted.

Three points on the content of my report.

Point number 1 concerns OLAF as an investigation unit which identifies and investigates suspicious cases quickly and efficiently.

The legal basis for this is in place.

Together with the Council, we have done everything within our power.

The development of OLAF is well under way.

Point number 2 concerns the European financial public prosecutor who, in the initial stage, has the right to support the national courts in prosecuting criminal offences committed by officials or employees of the Union.

Point number 3 concerns really effective disciplinary procedures.

The Staff Regulations and Financial Regulation have long made provision for the competent decision-makers to pay for damage for which they are responsible out of their own pocket in cases of gross negligence or intent.

This provision has never been applied.

The Commission is planning even now to delete it from the Financial Regulation.

That would be precisely the wrong signal.

We urge the Commission to reconsider such a move.

What is wrong with the present disciplinary procedures is that, of necessity, they lead to huge conflicts of interest.

In the case of senior officials, the College of Commissioners decides whether or not disciplinary proceedings should be instituted and it is the Commission which passes the final judgement, at the proposal of a disciplinary board on which senior officials have to advise on the fate of senior officials, i.e. colleagues sit in judgement on colleagues.

That cannot work and it does not work.

As long as this system is maintained, the accusation will be made time and again, rightly or wrongly, that proceedings are open to manipulation.

Nor will this change once the disciplinary board becomes an interinstitutional board, i.e. a board of officials from various institutions.

It will only change if the Commission takes up the proposal of real externalisation, as agreed by the House in the vote on the Hulten report on 19 January, in which Parliament called for disciplinary proceedings in the case of infringements of the Financial Regulation to be referred to an external chamber of the Court of Justice or the Court of Auditors so that proceedings are objective and fair beyond doubt.

We even stipulated in this report that the Chamber should form part of the Court of Auditors, with the Court of Justice sitting in appeal.

The report also includes a number of points from the White Paper on the reform of the Commission in connection with OLAF.

And yet I have just heard from some quarters that we should postpone a decision on these points and not take a stand on them just yet.

Except that the Commission wants to implement all the points addressed here before the summer recess.

If we do not take a stand on them now, then we can spare ourselves the trouble altogether.

One last word to Mrs Schreyer: I know from conversations last week with the members of the OLAF Supervisory Committee that the recruitment and appointment procedures for OLAF are proceeding too slowly.

Clearly one reason for this is that the Commission is obviously proving to be too inflexible, despite the fact that, on paper, it has transferred full powers to the director of OLAF in a decision in due and proper form.

I can only urge you to stand by your own decisions and not create difficulties where none exists.

Mr President, I speak on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market. I am standing in for the draftsman of the opinion of the Committee, my colleague Mr MacCormick, who is unable to be here today.

In our Community, there is hardly anything worse than fraud to undermine public confidence in the activities of the Union, and so the views of the rapporteur deserve our full support.

Fraud, of course, affects only a small fraction - i.e. just over 1 % - of the EU' s total budget, but it is a very serious problem which seems to extend to almost all political sectors.

The EU budget, however, is largely administered within the Member States, and this is where huge potential for fraud exists.

We must also remember that applicant countries, i.e. the countries of Central and Eastern Europe, should be involved in this fraud prevention process for the very reason that such a large share of the Community budget is administered within the Member States.

So far, fewer than half of the Member States have ratified the protocol on protecting the Union' s financial interests. This process should therefore be speeded up considerably.

Furthermore, some Member States are particularly unwilling to undertake the mutual exchange of information concerning fraud. Therefore it is important for Member States to have a direct obligation to report cases of VAT fraud, for example, to the Commission.

It is quite appropriate to examine the possibilities of creating the post of public prosecutor, expressly from the point of view of the fight against fraud, and this should be done, but even that will be to no avail, if the Member States lack the political will to protect the Communities' financial interests.

As far as OLAF' s position is concerned, it is important to protect its independence and equally important for the European Parliament to come to an agreement with OLAF with regard to the conditions on which Parliament can obtain information about its operations.

Mr President, in the time available, I wish on behalf of the Economic Committee to stress three issues that we considered to be of cardinal importance when we examined the annual report on the Community's financial interests and the fight against fraud.

First was the issue of definition.

It is the case that the Commission have come under a significant amount of attention in recent years from Parliament and from the European public at large who want the Commission to deal with allegations of fraud, but it is also important that we should know what we are talking about when we define fraud.

The annual report itself indicates that for the first time there has been an attempt made to try to assess what amounts to fraud and what is general irregularity, and I am of the view that it does not help the reputation of our European institutions if we are lax with definition.

It is important that the work being undertaken by the Commission should be expanded because, in a situation in which 20% of irregularity amounts to fraud, the fact of the matter is that by referring to it as fraud and irregularity, European citizens can often be left with an impression that all of the claims are fraudulent ones.

The second point that I want to make is about the commitment of Member States to deal with fraud.

The fact of the matter is that Member States have a high responsibility here.

They are responsible for administering some 80% of the EU's budget and they must recognise that they are, at the very least, partners if not prime movers in attempting to address this important issue, and the report indicates that the performance of Member States has been mixed to say the least.

My final point concerns the accession countries.

We must demand that the accession countries also endeavour to work in conjunction with the European Union and to the highest standards.

Mr President, Commissioner, when deciding here in Parliament whether or not to grant discharge to the Commission, we check that there is no irregularity in expenditure by the administration.

In the past - as we are now all aware - there have been irregularities within the Commission.

Each report by the Court of Auditors also highlights the decisive role of the Member States in distributing Community funds.

A number of errors for which the Member States are to blame occur during the distribution of funds, which makes us apprehensive, especially as a considerable percentage is the result of fraud.

Consequently, it is not just within the Commission that we need to wield an instrument to fight fraud, which we call OLAF.

OLAF is the outcome of the modus operandi of the Member States and the Commission and should take on an objective role precisely so as to get to the bottom of these errors and prevent them from arising.

The EU must use European measures such as the introduction of the euro to prove its European competence to the outside world, because the accompanying counterfeiting industry, to name but one example, is an external matter.

Nevertheless, deeper causes for error rates clearly lie in the different handling systems in the Member States.

Right from the outset, legislative texts are often worded differently and allow perfectly legal but differing definitions of fraud.

This opens the door to fraud.

Just think of the example of the collection of value added tax.

Under no circumstances should OLAF become nothing more than a help desk.

OLAF is not one of your broadcasts for DIY enthusiasts, along the lines of "How can we build a model railway?"

The issue should not be taken lightly.

Protecting the financial interests of the Union and fighting fraud are a necessity, pure and simple, which call for a uniform instrument which can act independently, preventively, efficiently and as a deterrent, and which depend upon transparent regulations both internally and externally, so that everyone knows where they stand.

I would like this financial instrument to have an additional name such as prosecutor, a broad-shouldered European financial prosecutor.

This prosecutor must be accepted by the Member States, take on an active role and, at the same time, be integrated into the national jurisdiction of the Member States. I would remind you at this point that Parliament called for an external chamber for budgetary discipline in its resolution of 19 January.

In my view this is a good idea and is not only worth considering, it is indispensable if we are to create a comprehensive area of justice and law.

A neutral, objective judgement will serve the cause and the individual concerned, condemnation of colleagues by colleagues will not.

OLAF is no Big Brother à la Orson Welles, but is limited in its remit by the rule of law. The immunity of members, for example, will of course continue to be protected.

I call on the Intergovernmental Conference to take our concerns on board.

We are fighting here for technical measures which, hopefully, will not turn into a long-running saga.

We must concentrate once again on European values so that, for example, our money is not misappropriated for the drawing up of military measures.

I know it is difficult to impart ideals and virtue to another person.

But that is where our efforts should be concentrated. Because worthlessness soon turns into helplessness.

- (PT) Mr President, the current year is the first in which OLAF is fully operational.

It needs to be pointed out here that this is a decisive step in protecting the financial interests of the Union, the impetus for which came from this House and, in particular, from the Committee on Budgetary Control and from the present rapporteur, our colleague, Herbert Bösch.

With an increase in staff, with a new structure and independence, all the conditions are now in place for OLAF to concentrate on fighting fraud in an area where the objective and verifiable figures point to a more serious situation.

Fraud and other irregularities in the traditional own resources reported by Member States reached a total of EUR 538 million in 1998, an amount unparalleled in any other area of Community expenditure, either in absolute or relative terms.

Special report No 9 of the Court of Auditors on the protection of the European Union' s financial interests in the area of VAT on intra-Community trade points to an even more serious situation.

According to the Court of Auditors, the gap between actual receipts and their theoretical amount is EUR 70 thousand million.

Unlike the main areas of expenditure, which the Commission monitors and on which it imposes a system of sanctions, there is nothing comparable in these two vital areas of the Community' s own resources.

The Commission, specifically in its recent reports on administrative cooperation and on procedures for collection and taxation, describes a situation which is characterised by the maintenance of a system for VAT collection, which was only intended to be used on a temporary basis but is being used permanently. This system is also characterised by the increasing complexity of the system and by the widespread shortage of human resources and monitoring materials compared to the volume of transactions.

Despite the fact that there is widespread agreement on the need to overcome the problems of fighting fraud which result from restrictions imposed by national legislation, or to the lack of a legal basis in Community legislation, the Commission' s proposals have not, until today, met with any response and the anti-fraud sub-committee in the area of indirect taxation has found it impossible, in the words of the Commission "to achieve meaningful progress and cannot take the necessary decisions to improve the fight against fraud" .

What is more serious than this is the fact that the Commission' s reports on VAT collection have been scandalously disregarded by the other institutions and have not been followed up to any degree by the Member States.

Compliance with Article 280 of the Treaty, specifically where it requires the effective and equivalent protection of the Community' s financial interests will be dead letter unless we overcome the situation of there being a loophole in the law in the area of traditional own resources and VAT.

The protection of the Community' s financial interests, and particularly those of the taxpayers, who comply, cannot continue to be disregarded when it comes to indirect taxation.

Mr President, I too would like to start by congratulating Mr Bösch on his relentless efforts to turn OLAF into a success.

There are many points in the present resolution which the Liberal Group can endorse.

Firstly - and this cannot be repeated enough - we think that at the forthcoming Intergovernmental Conference, a decision should be made in favour of setting up a European Public Prosecutor, which in its capacity as an independent body, will work to safeguard the financial interests of the European Union.

We would call on the Commission to submit proposals to this effect as soon as possible.

Also, the date mentioned in the report is important, in our opinion.

We also endorse the proposal for an external chamber to enforce budget discipline, which will mainly be concerned with examining the financial liability of officials.

In our opinion, it is important that this task is taken from the Commission, so as to take away any semblance of nepotism and such like.

OLAF starts its first full working year this year. We will all have to wait and see what the outcome of that will be.

Expectations are naturally very high. One aspect, however, could be improved on, namely the Supervisory Committee, as Mr Bösch calls it in his report.

Everyone has a right to a defence, including those who need to be investigated by OLAF.

We must see to it that these investigations are carried out as independently and fairly as possible. I would call on the Commission to submit proposals to this effect too.

There has been a lot of publicity lately surrounding the issue as to whether or not OLAF should be able to investigate the European Investment Bank regarding the use of European funding, as well as the European Central Bank.

The Liberal Group is of the opinion that this should clearly be the case as these are European institutions too. They cannot remain outside OLAF' s general scope of investigation.

We support the Commission so as to make this possible.

Finally, over the past few years, the European Court of Auditors has become increasingly aware that fraud and irregularities in structural funds are on the increase, whilst those in agricultural funds are still excessive but are dropping.

This is diametrically opposed to the opinion held by the Commission, which believes that fraud and irregularities occur far less in structural funds than they do in agricultural funds.

This anomaly must be resolved without delay. The structural funds are gaining in importance all the time and form a large area of investigation for OLAF and the Commission.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, Commissioner, I too would first of all like to congratulate Mr Bösch on his sound report and, unlike Mr Dell'Alba, I think that Mr Bösch has indeed drawn the right lessons from OLAF' s annual report which was published late last year.

We might as well admit it, there are a great many money-grubbers active within the European Union, and organised crime no longer concentrates solely on drug smuggling, the arms trade, trafficking in humans, meat fraud, alcohol and cigarette smuggling, VAT merry-go-round fraud and oil fraud, and has not done so for a long time.

They are all forms of crime which cause serious harm to the EU' s budget, both on the revenue side and the expenditure side.

We may have had a single market since 1993 which accommodates the free movement of goods, services, people, capital, as well as organised criminals, but this single market does not exist - and this is so unfortunate - for police services and magistrates alike.

On my own behalf, I will therefore stick my neck out and endorse all paragraphs of the Bösch report which call for the setting up of a European Public Prosecutor' s office. I know it is a controversial issue, even within my own group.

Despite this, I believe that such a European Public Prosecutor' s office should be set up. I would therefore ask the European Commission, as a matter of extreme urgency, to meet the request of the Bösch report to add an extra clause to the present OLAF regulation before 30 June, providing for a kind of trial project in which a European Public Prosecutor is appointed from within OLAF who can only act on behalf of members and staff of the European institutions.

I entreat Commissioner Schreyer to give very specific answers to this request and would ask her whether she would be prepared to take any initiative in this matter before 30 June.

Mr President, Mr Bösch's report deals clearly and relevantly with the problems bound up with protecting the EU' s financial interests and combating fraud.

Fraud is a scourge as far as the EU is concerned.

I do not know how large a percentage of the Member States' budgets disappears due to fraud and irregularities.

In my own country, it is close on zero per cent, and I think that what we have noted in recent years in the EU' s accounts reflects the fact that common funds are not handled so carefully and meticulously as money which the States regard as their own.

Mr Bösch's report goes a very long way towards representing the positions adopted by my group, most especially in its observations concerning the European Investment Bank and the European Central Bank.

We have a problem in relation to appointing a European Public Prosecutor, whose office we would regard as an integral part of the federal EU we do not wish to see.

We think that the problems highlighted can be solved at national level.

We are quite clear about the fact that these provisions are aimed especially at the new Member States whose legal arrangements differ from those of the EU countries. We think, however, that this ought to be an incentive to engage in negotiations designed to promote cooperation between the legal systems.

However, it is not, of course, by means of the present report that we are to decide this matter and, against that background, I should like to inform you that my group is voting in favour of Mr Bösch's report because we think that there are clear demands which Parliament is making here and with which the Commission must comply.

Mr President, Mr Bösch has prepared a good report on protection against fraud.

We agree with the way in which the problems are described, but I do not believe that crime and theft are combated by establishing a common public prosecution service and common penalties and by appointing more inspectors within the EU.

I believe that it is through transparency that irregularities can most effectively be cleared up: complete openness about the budget procedure, complete openness as to who has been involved in deciding upon an appropriation, complete openness about who the recipient of the appropriation is and complete access to all documents for the ombudsman and for the European Parliament' s and the national parliaments' auditors and supervisory committees.

If it can always be seen who has obtained what, fraud will be revealed by journalists and a critical public - perfectly free of charge and with far greater preventative effect.

I would therefore ask the Commissioners to promise us that, in future, Parliament, the Court of Auditors and the ombudsman will be allowed to see any document.

What are we not allowed to see?

What is the ombudsman not allowed to see?

When will we be given a complete overview of all the committees and working parties, together with their members?

Will our rapporteurs be allowed to check on any payment from the funds?

Lack of transparency is the fraudsters' best friend and makes it more difficult to clarify matters.

It is due to a lack of transparency that the new Commission too will, unfortunately, be concealing fraud instead of bringing every instance of it into the light of day and so deterring anyone else who might have the same idea.

Mr President, Commissioner, we are dealing with the first report sent to us by OLAF and I would like to thank Mr Bösch for the excellent work he has presented to us.

The most interesting parts of his work are surely those which refer to the subject of the report, that is to say 1998, and OLAF, the body which is presenting its first piece of work.

I agree that this report perhaps prejudges certain aspects which should be subject to further debates in the Committee on Budgetary Control and in this House, but I would like to highlight the positive aspects of its contribution.

With reference to 1998, I believe that we should recognise that, after having intensified the task of control, which should be initiated by Parliament and which OLAF carries out, the number of cases of fraud and irregularities has stabilised.

Without relaxing our efforts to control expenditure - of which we have shown signs in the past - we can see that this stabilisation has been the result of an increase in control.

We should therefore be pleased about this and hope that this work continues, so that cases of fraud can be reduced rather than merely stabilised.

It is clear that, in fundamental fraud, there are discrepancies between what the Court of Auditors says and what OLAF says.

In OLAF' s judgement, it appears that it is not in the Structural Funds that fraud and bad management prevail.

It is other expenditure that we should be concerned about.

In any event, returning to OLAF, by means of this report, we should, in my view, ask for OLAF to be provided as soon as possible with the officials which have been allocated to it.

However, I think it is very important that, in this first stage - precisely because we are interested in control - we do not increase OLAF' s scope of activity so soon after it has begun its work.

I understand that there are and there will be - although we hope that this is not the case - great problems with the counterfeiting of currency, trademarks or VAT.

It is essential that we allow OLAF to continue to pursue its scope of activity little by little and that we expand its role at a later date.

Finally, we should not duplicate responsibilities.

In order to use resources correctly, one body should be responsible for each issue and we should not have a situation where everybody is responsible for everything.

I therefore believe that we should clearly separate objectives and not allow confusion to reign.

At the end of the day "he that too much embraceth, holds little", as we say in Spain, so if we want to manage control, we cannot all have the same objective.

Mr President, I would like to join the many speakers who have congratulated Mr Bösch on his report.

As usual - and as has already been mentioned - the annual report shows that in 1998 too, an excessive proportion of the European resources was not spent according to the rules. As usual, most irregularities pertain to expenditure in the Member States and vary in nature.

The irregularities are partly caused by deliberate abuse of the regulations, partly due to errors in the implementation of European legislation or simply down to bad policy.

I would like to distance myself somewhat from what Mr Mulder said on this score. The fact that so much fraud is being committed using agricultural funds is a sign that something is wrong with the way in which we organise our support for agriculture and this needs to change.

The steps required to fight fraud have been mentioned on countless occasions, including today.

I would like to highlight two.

Firstly, there are still Member States that have not signed the Convention on the Protection of the Financial Interests of the EU. My own country is one of them and I hereby call on the Dutch Parliament to ratify the act which ratifies the Convention and which has been with the Chamber since October.

In addition, it is also important that steps are being taken within the Intergovernmental Conference to appoint a European Public Prosecutor.

To my amazement, I noticed that in one of the amendments to this report tabled by the PPE-DE Group, an attempt was made to limit the mandate of this public prosecutor, whilst I was under the impression that the PPE-DE was actually in favour of it.

The PPE-DE Group would like to limit the European Public Prosecutor' s mandate to the European institutions only, while we have just seen that most fraud takes place within the Member States. The PPE-DE Group had better have a good explanation for this.

We have made a new start with the independent OLAF.

In my opinion, it is rather important for the functioning of OLAF that its work be open to public scrutiny, and for there to be set rules governing investigations, which are available for perusal by Parliament too. This will prevent us from running behind the facts in future, as is now the case with the 1998 discharge procedure.

Mr President, my last point concerns the European Parliament itself.

As you know, the Court recently decided in an initial ruling that OLAF only has limited access to the European Parliament.

I regret that the Court has reached this decision and hope that it will arrive at a different decision in the final ruling. Meanwhile, however, I would like to make it clear that immunity for parliamentarians does not mean that we are above the law.

If the Court' s final ruling stipulates that OLAF has no access to Parliament because the rules will not permit this, we must adapt our rules rather than overrule the decision, so as to grant OLAF access to Parliament, including parliamentarians, because, I repeat, we are not above the law.

Ladies and gentlemen, this report is an excellent illustration of what should be done and what should not be done.

As far as we are concerned, combating fraud is more than a priority, it is a commitment we have to the people who elected us.

This principle has been emphasised all the more by the revelation of inefficiencies within the Community institutions.

In this respect, our determination to implement sound management procedures beforehand that are capable, subsequently, of being monitored must be absolutely foolproof.

In order to do so, we must focus on the effectiveness of the procedures set in place, particularly under OLAF.

So, I beg you, please, do not try, for ideological reasons, to come and complicate matters, adding yet more structures and procedures.

This is the reason why we are not in favour of creating a European Public Prosecutor' s Office.

We must be able to have confidence in relying on the national structures.

In fact, the proposal to create a European Public Prosecutor' s Department is unacceptable since this requires us to be effective immediately.

In the same spirit, we shall support Amendment No 13 from the Group of the Party of European Socialists, which will prevent us creating a budgetary discipline body just for show.

These declarations of intent are more than anything motivated, I fear, by the determination to establish a European sovereignty on the pretext of protecting the Community budget, which, I must remind you, is made up of contributions from our Member States.

From the point of view of the effectiveness of the fight against fraud, these creations are no more than fresh grounds for sterile conflicts.

In conclusion, I feel that the Commission' s watchwords must be rigour, discipline and proper collaboration.

I sincerely believe that the rest can be achieved by adhering to OLAF' s prerogatives, combined with proper cooperation between national and European audit authorities.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, a few days ago, the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung published a survey which showed that an overwhelming majority of my fellow countrymen were in favour of a more common approach to judicial matters.

No other area attracted nearly as much support for new initiatives at European level.

Other surveys in the past have always confirmed that this applies both to Germans and to the citizens in most other Member States of the Union.

We are therefore responding to the expectations of the people in tabling proposals on how to strengthen effectively the protection of the European Union against fraud.

There are without doubt more pleasant topics of conversation than fraud and corruption, I grant you, but discussing them demonstrates clearly that we are not sweeping this tricky question under the carpet; on the contrary, we are setting ourselves this challenge, in precisely those cases which affect the institutions of the Union itself.

This is why the Bösch report deserves particular attention and support.

It was not adopted unanimously by the Committee on Budgetary Control for nothing, as I have already explained.

Allow me to congratulate you on this report.

It clearly illustrates that creating the European Anti-Fraud Office OLAF is an important step, but is only a step on the path towards the European prosecutor which I have called for time and again both in a personal capacity and as rapporteur.

A public prosecutor' s office to protect the interests of the Union against fraud would be the only really effective instrument to counteract the threat from organised crime.

Organised crime has identified the institutions of the European Union as a particularly easy target.

I am delighted that both the Commission and Parliament have included this question in the Intergovernmental Conference.

The Committee on Budgetary Control has gone one step further in this report.

We want an even more proactive approach and are therefore waiting for the Commission to present proposals for the first stage of a European public prosecutor' s office on the basis of the current Article 280 and I really do hope, Commissioner Schreyer, that you will revise your unfortunately somewhat wait-and-see attitude and accommodate us here.

Mr President, allow me to refer to what was indeed said earlier but could not be answered.

My question is to Mr Dell'Alba; could the honourable Member explain what I, as chairman of the Committee on Budgetary Control, allegedly blocked for weeks.

I require an answer and I should like it recorded in the minutes.

Mrs Theato, you know perfectly well what I am talking about.

The matter was discussed at length in the Conference of Presidents.

In your capacity as chair of the Committee on Budgetary Control, not in a personal capacity, you were assigned to assist the Conference of Presidents and the President, Mrs Fontaine, in drawing up the Parliament' s position on the code of conduct for relations with the Commission.

I contend, together with the group chairmen, who have, moreover, disclaimed you, that on the 13 April you informed the Conference of Presidents that on the whole you were in agreement with the spirit of Annex III on the exchange of information with the Commission.

I contend that twenty days later, to the outrage of your partner, Mr Napolitano, you sent a letter in which you said you could no longer agree to this annex. You mentioned points in German which no one had checked, causing uproar among the group chairmen who thanked you, saying that they would take the dossier back because in effect the situation was no longer tenable.

One group chairman even left the room on an occasion when the matter came up on the agenda one day.

Do not pretend that you know nothing, you know perfectly well what happened.

There are perhaps some of my fellow Members of Parliament who do not know, but I am stating this for the benefit of the House, so that it can be entered in the Minutes: for several weeks Mrs Theato obstructed an agreement with the Commission, thereby putting the President of Parliament and the chairmen of the political groups in an awkward position.

That is the truth of the matter.

I do not wish to interfere in the debate but the issue of OLAF and Napolitano was of course a highly controversial one in the entire House and we are all aware of the problems associated with it.

That has now been cleared up.

Mr President, today we are debating a report which goes much further than the figures on alleged fraud or errors in the Community accounts. It demands that the Members of this Parliament act responsibly.

We must address the lack of moral responsibility on the part of bureaucracies, which was condemned in such a masterly way by Kafka.

This lack of moral responsibility is perversely able to involve people in a labyrinthine quest for their exact legal position and subject them to phantom judgements regarding unknown crimes. These situations have happily been overcome in Europe.

The creation of an effective and transparent office to fight fraud is a task with which all Members of this Parliament agree, and I hope that all the institutions agree.

The creation of an omnipotent mechanism, designed to pursue officials on the basis of secret denunciations, accusations and lists of suspects, riding roughshod over the individual guarantees, statutes and regulations which provide basic legal security for people working in the institutions, is a form of irresponsibility which this Parliament or any Community institution should have nothing to do with, because such a climate of suspicion would only benefit the eurosceptics.

The Socialist Group, which is interested in combating fraud as well as protecting the rights of citizens, including officials, and the construction of a Europe based on the principles of fair play, democracy, proximity to the citizens, transparency, efficiency and solidarity, has presented an amendment to paragraph 29 of this report, which lays down the principle that combating fraud should not take precedence over the basic rights of officials.

To demand lists of suspects, as suggested in the report, would be a form of McCarthyism which is beneath the dignity of this House and, furthermore, it may possibly be illegal.

I would like to remind you that claims have been made that no action has been taken against this type of action and that OLAF' s monitoring committee, in relation to these appeals, is aware that certain aspects are not functioning properly within this body.

While accepting that, with the dynamic of European construction, the increase in the budget and the growth of the administration, there may be more fraud and errors, we must not fall into a kind of policing paranoia, or at least this Parliament must not.

The immunity which we enjoy as MEPs must not be confused with impunity.

It is important that this report does not simply create a Kafkaesque type of system, but that it also provides a guarantee for officials.

Mr President, I have to depart a little bit from what I intended to say.

I have some sympathy with the last speaker: sometimes the Committee on Budgetary Control gets so involved with the important work they are doing, that they are unable to see the wood for the trees.

I also welcome the presentation on behalf of the Legal Affairs Committee and the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee which took a balanced approach to the major and indeed legitimate concerns of the Committee on Budgetary Control about fraud.

I heard Mr van Hulten's reference to the fact that OLAF should have the right to investigate Members of Parliament.

He has a point and a minority of people in this Parliament agree with that.

But before we embark on such a radical decision, we should look at the history, particularly in the United States, of the relationship between security authorities and public figures and recognise that we could overstep the mark by giving such powers to OLAF.

In the end, OLAF might have the political leverage and power to demand as much money and staff as it wanted.

We should not throw staff, money or powers at an organisation just because problems exist.

Those problems exist and we have dealt with the solution to the problem.

Mr Bösch has rightly dealt with the problem of identifying and prosecuting fraud when it occurs.

I do not agree with all of his report.

There are a number of paragraphs I have doubts about - 14, 15 and 16 for example, regarding the legal basis and whether it is necessary to involve both national and European responsibility to resolve problems of fraud that affect national states more than they do the European Union.

I have run out of time without saying what I wanted to say but I wanted to respond to some of the points already made.

Mr President, I should like to begin by congratulating the rapporteur on a very good report. The very fact that my Italian colleague is opposed to it means that it really is a report of very high quality.

Even though there was a slight decline in fraud and irregularities between 1997 and 1998, there is nonetheless still a need for more effective supervisory mechanisms.

Reform of the Commission is now under way.

Mr Kinnock has submitted a timetable, and it is now up to us to applaud it.

I am very impressed with the reform plan.

In general, it is both visionary and realistic.

There are nonetheless a number of sticking points, and these are what we ought to draw attention to and criticise.

Parliament has already proposed, in the Van Hulten report, that an external court should be established under the aegis of the Court of Auditors. This would deal with disciplinary matters and help recover money which has been paid out unlawfully.

This idea is one we should stick to, I think.

If such a body were to be established, this would mean that disciplinary matters would be taken away from the Commission.

We have had a lot of bad experience with internal disciplinary councils.

At present, officials who have had actions brought against them by the disciplinary council have colleagues of theirs sitting in judgement over them.

Both the ECHO and MED cases are all too well-known examples of this state of affairs.

I also agree with the rapporteur when he criticises setting up an advisory panel to deal with irregularities. We have, of course, established OLAF to deal with suspicions of fraud and irregularities.

Another panel would serve only to undermine OLAF' s powers.

I cannot, however, vote in favour of setting up a European Public Prosecutor' s office.

I can well understand people' s being tired of all the fraud and therefore demanding that we have a common public prosecutor' s office.

It would, however, be a colossal enterprise to set up when the problems are, in reality, elsewhere.

In actual fact, there is a need for a fundamental staffing reform.

It is, for all that, only the most serious cases which will have penal consequences.

Ninety per cent of cases will be disciplinary matters concerning negligence or incompetence.

Instead, there is a need for public, internal supervision and for more leeway when it comes to sacking people.

We need changes to staff regulations and to the disciplinary procedure, as also proposed in the report.

I would also point out that I had three minutes in which to speak.

I spoke for only two, but I am very disciplined.

I am happy to let someone else use my time. You should also, of course, be allowed to make mistakes from time to time.

Mr Blak, allow me to apologise officially.

You are quite right, you had three minutes.

I was not wearing my glasses.

Do you wish to add anything else?

Well that puts the friendship between Denmark and Bavaria back on terra firma.

Thank you Mr Blak for overlooking my error.

Mr President, this is just the sort of issue which gives rise to lofty declarations.

But I should like to go into a few points which, as far as I am concerned, are relatively unclear.

Problem number one: every year the media present the refusal to issue a declaration of assurance as an indication of the alleged or actual state of corruption in EU finances.

At the same time, however, both the Court of Auditors and the Council of Ministers grant this refusal to issue a declaration of assurance the status of a mere water-level report, while we here in Parliament and the media see it as an indication of the poor state of the Union' s finances.

I think we need to amend and clarify the basis of the matters about which we are talking.

Otherwise we shall find ourselves in a situation in which every year we regularly and hence permanently, as it were, negligently cast an air of general suspicion over the state of EU finances, if this state of affairs is allowed to continue.

Problem number two: of course further investigation may show that some financial irregularities are in fact cases of fraud.

Nonetheless, these two points need to be kept apart both in terms of how they are defined and how they are measured, because otherwise they will both be lumped together and this will give the impression of a huge level of fraud which is not justified to that extent.

Problem number three: clearly - and I am grateful to Mr Bösch for pointing this out - the findings of the Court of Auditors differ from those of the Commission as to the extent of financial irregularity which has occurred in relations between the agricultural budget and the Structural Funds.

Clearly there are measuring problems, statistical problems which we must solve so that we know what we are talking about when we start investigations or conduct further investigations.

Mr President, I also congratulate Mr Bösch on his report.

He is the acknowledged expert within the European Parliament and, to a large extent, was the architect of the new OLAF.

One thing that is certain to create a stir in terms of the EU is big stories about fraud.

That is quite right too because any fraud is unacceptable.

The figure that is being attached to it is about 5% of the EU budget.

But there are two important points to remember, which have been touched upon several times here today - and Mr Cunha has just raised them again.

The Court of Auditors does not distinguish between fraud and administrative and financial irregularities; that is, administrative mistakes and people who set out to cheat the EU of money.

To give you an example, a farmer may fill out a form incorrectly.

That is not to say that he means to defraud.

It may be that he measured his land incorrectly.

And then there are the big fraudsters: the people who, for example, import cigarettes illegally, avoiding tax.

There is a huge difference between these two things.

We need to have them distinguished much more clearly.

Let us not forget that 80% of the fraud takes place within Member States.

Yesterday the Commission made a commitment to us that they want to cut irregularities by 2%.

We want to know whether the Member States will follow that lead.

It is clear that a lot of the problems lie there, in particular with the Structural Funds.

To take up Mr Dell'Alba's point, the Socialists will be voting against a number of paragraphs in this report, not necessarily because we do not agree with them, but because it is not the right context in which to discuss these points which relate to the White Paper.

Finally, I want to read out a list of shame - Member States which have not yet ratified the Convention on the Protection of the Financial Interests of the EU: Belgium, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Italy, Spain, Portugal, Greece, Ireland and France.

It is about time they signed up.

They have had five years to do it.

Let us see them ratify it.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the fight against fraud and protecting the financial interests of the Community are among the top priorities of the new Commission.

The fight against fraud includes activities such as preventing, uncovering and prosecuting customs and subsidy fraud or tax evasion, as well, of course, as uncovering and prosecuting irregularities within the institutions of the European Union.

But I am most pleased that numerous contributions to the debate have stated that we need to make a distinction between financial irregularity and fraud.

When we talk of the Court of Auditors' report, this covers the whole spectrum of financial irregularities.

We are talking here of the UCLAF or OLAF report on fraud, i.e. deliberate damage to the financial interests of the European Union.

The report before you, which is the subject of Mr Bösch' s report, is the last report drawn up by UCLAF on the fight against fraud in 1998.

Although UCLAF only had 120 employees at the time, this annual report illustrates the considerable success of their work, in my view.

There were 5,318 cases of suspicion of irregularity or fraud investigated by UCLAF in 1998, in cooperation with the Member States, and around 20% of these cases were classed as fraud following the investigation.

I should also point out in connection with the question as to why the findings in the Court of Auditors' report are different, that it has been ascertained that the number of irregularities is falling in the area of agricultural policy, while it is clearly highlighted here that regulations as to which cases of fraud or suspicion must be reported to the Commission differ from one Member State to another, and this explains the difference between the two reports.

Mr Blak stated in his speech that the citizens of the European Union are sick and tired of fraud.

Unfortunately, I must point out that duty- or tax-free cigarettes still sell like hot cakes and tax evasion is often regarded as a national pastime.

In this respect, we face a situation in which we must acknowledge that we cannot completely eradicate fraud which damages the European Union's financial interests.

We must of course do everything within our power to fight customs offences and offences in connection with subsidies and taxation which damage the Community' s financial interests.

I should like briefly to go into the individual proposals in the Bösch report which now come within a wider context; this applies, for example, to the proposal on disciplinary procedures or the chamber at the European Court of Auditors.

The Commission explained in its statements on Parliament' s demands in connection with the 1998 discharge procedure that it did not think that the right way forward was to call in a chamber of the Court of Auditors or the Court of Justice to issue orders in disciplinary proceedings against employees on the grounds of irregularities in connection with the budget, because the European Treaties had granted each of these bodies its own specific remit.

It is precisely the European Court of Justice to which employees can take recourse if they wish to appeal against a judgement in disciplinary proceedings.

As a result, such a move cannot be reconciled with the present Treaties.

The Commission therefore decided to take up the proposals contained in last year' s independent experts' report, which are extremely comprehensive and relate to overall financial management, fraud prevention and disciplinary procedures.

The Commission explained that it also shared Parliament' s view that confidence in the objectivity of disciplinary proceedings would be enhanced by involving an outside agency.

It explained this in its White Paper tabled on 1 March and will also make detailed proposals on reforming disciplinary law in the paper on the overall future disciplinary procedure to be published by the Commission in October.

Naturally we shall include Parliament' s considerations in the overall procedure and in our proposals during discussions.

It was rightly pointed out in numerous debates and in the report that good cooperation and the involvement of the Member States are essential if the fight against fraud to the detriment of the financial interests of the European Community is to be efficient.

Article 280 of the Amsterdam Treaty also makes this clear.

The complaint was also rightly voiced that the corresponding agreement between the Member States has only been ratified by a few Member States.

I should like to thank all the speakers who wrote home calling for the necessary steps to be taken at long last.

OLAF, the European Anti-Fraud Office, is itself working intensively with the Member States and, in certain areas, with other countries, in order to conclude cooperation agreements.

Since the UCLAF report was filed, the European Anti-Fraud Office OLAF has succeeded, for example, in concluding an agreement with the Anti-Mafia in Italy, the aim being to achieve good cooperation at all levels and with all organisations dedicated to fighting fraud.

A conference on this subject is to be held in Ancona at the end of the week.

The Commission welcomes the fact that some enlargement countries are already taking steps to set up and activate structures similar to those set up by the European Anti-Fraud Office.

In Poland, for example, it has been decided to set up a Polish OLAF.

I should like briefly to go into the subject of "What happens next in the legislative area?" and point out that the Commission has proposed for the Intergovernmental Conference, which is responsible for revising the Treaties, that the present system for protecting the financial interests be supplemented by a legal basis creating a European Public Prosecutor and allowing provisions on the criminal prosecution of cross-border fraud to be adopted.

The Member States have indicated that they will not amend the Treaty in this area.

However, the Commission does not intend to give up on this and we are continuing to refine this proposal and will ensure that it is on the agenda of the Intergovernmental Conference.

I should like to comment briefly on the complaints filed by the Commission against the European Central Bank and the European Investment Bank.

The aim is to implement precisely what was introduced into the OLAF regulation by the European Parliament, namely that OLAF is responsible for fighting fraud in all the institutions of the European Community.

Unfortunately, neither bank has made a move over recent weeks.

They too have probably been waiting for the outcome of the litigation pending as the result of the proceedings instituted by a number of members against the amendment of the European Parliament' s Rules of Procedure.

I think that the summary procedures of the Court of First Instance have in fact made it clear that what is at issue is not the legal bases for OLAF - in this respect neither bank can withdraw or hide behind this - the issue is, of course, the need to safeguard the independence of the institutions.

Not that this was ever disputed for the European Central Bank.

Of course, the other issue is that it needs to be made clear that the immunity of members is a democratic achievement and cannot be interfered with under any circumstances.

I should like to thank you for calling for account to be taken of the principles of the rule of law in all procedures, including the work of OLAF.

I think that the new director of OLAF defends this view very vigorously, including in a personal capacity.

We shall have the opportunity of debating other reports on the subject of fighting fraud this year.

The OLAF Supervisory Committee, which monitors the independence of OLAF, will soon submit its report, which we shall also have the opportunity to debate.

I should point out that the Commission is currently working on a fundamental strategy paper on the fight against fraud. This too will certainly lead to further intensive and fruitful debate.

I should like to thank the rapporteur, Mr Bösch, for his report and, above all, I should also like to thank the House for supporting the introduction and the work of OLAF so unwaveringly.

The vote will take place today at 12 noon.

(The sitting was suspended at 11.55 a.m. and resumed at 12.00 p.m.)

Madam President, the following problem has arisen in connection with the report by Mrs Schierhuber now being put to the vote: the Group of the Party of European Socialists and the Group of the European United Left filed a motion for a split vote on a number of points.

However, for some technical reason, the services did not receive it.

Now we have the following problem: either you now allow an oral motion for a split vote on the article in question during the voting procedure and we vote today or, if that is not possible, then I move that we postpone the vote until tomorrow.

The services have, however, said that we have a tightly-packed voting programme tomorrow, so that it would perhaps make sense to vote today.

We would be happy to vote.

The vote is not the problem, the problem is that you did not receive the motion for a split vote in time.

Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf, indeed, I checked the situation: it was only this morning that we received the request for split voting, which was therefore not within the time limits set by our own rules.

In Parliament we have certain rules that are applicable to everyone.

They must be observed, and I cannot make any exceptions.

I must be frank and tell you that, even though I appreciate the problem.

We shall then proceed to the vote, unless you are going to propose postponing the vote, which is a proposal I would, of course, put to the vote.

Madam President, in that case - I understand your position - I should like to move that we postpone the vote until tomorrow or Thursday.

I would like to hear the opinion of our rapporteur, Mrs Schierhuber.

Madam President, I am sorry that the Socialists' voting list was not received by the services in time.

I should like to state unequivocally that I personally, as rapporteur, have no problem in accepting this split vote, even during today' s vote, and it would be good if we could vote today because, as you know, the Council of Agricultural Ministers is meeting today and tomorrow and it would be good if the agricultural ministers knew what we had decided here.

Unfortunately, if we vote tomorrow, it will be too late.

Mrs Schierhuber, let us be clear on this.

Personally speaking I would not have any objection to split voting either, but, once again, there are rules, and I cannot make exceptions.

This would establish a perfectly dreadful precedent and then there would no longer be any rules to govern the tabling of split voting requests.

You have just expressed your view to the effect that you prefer to have the vote today.

I shall give Mr Goepel the floor and then we shall proceed to vote on Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf' s proposal to postpone the vote until tomorrow morning or Thursday morning.

Madam President, I should like to explain on behalf of my group that we too have nothing against this oral amendment and I should like to support Mrs Schierhuber again here.

The Council of Agricultural Ministers is waiting for our decision and a postponement would not be a good idea.

(Parliament rejected the proposal to postpone the vote)

Following the vote on legislative proposal No 1 and adoption of the Commission proposal as amended

Madam President, I should like to ask the Commission if it has changed its opinion in the last twelve hours on the proposed amendments adopted by a large majority in the Committee on Agriculture.

Mrs Schreyer, can you give our rapporteur an answer in the affirmative?

Mrs Schierhuber, the Commission has not changed its opinion.

The Commission presented this proposal as the outcome of experience in past years.

We discussed a report on the fight against fraud on a previous occasion and that has a direct bearing on this.

I can only repeat that, if the question of the division of land is again discussed in the Council - and this was an important issue in the Committee on Agriculture - then the Commission is of course open to suggestions.

However, as the Commissioner for the budget, I am bound to say that a solution must be found which does not affect the budget.

Madam President, the members of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development are also very keen to put a stop to fraud in all areas in the Union.

We still do not have any right of codetermination in agriculture, which is why our only option is to refer this report back to committee and I urge the House to vote in favour of my motion.

Our rapporteur, Mrs Schierhuber, proposes referral to committee.

Is there anyone who wishes to speak in favour of referral to committee?

Madam President, I should like to speak for the motion.

The groups have agreed that this is the only way of exerting any influence.

To put it plainly, including to Commissioner Schreyer: I think that the Commission and Parliament are at one on the question of the fight against fraud; the question here is what methods will be chosen.

If the method now being chosen takes hold, it will kill off flax and hemp cultivation, which are an ecological form ideally suited to disadvantaged areas.

We must prevent this and Parliament and the Commission must join in the discussion to find a compromise.

(Parliament decided to refer the first part of the report to committee) - Following the vote on legislative proposal No 2 and adoption of the Commission proposal as amended

Madam President, exactly the same applies to this second decision as what you said for the first decision.

Two proposed amendments in this second file are of fundamental importance to the Committee on Agriculture, namely Amendments Nos 28 and 29.

I therefore again ask the Commission if it has perhaps revised its opinion here.

Madam President, my colleague Mr Fischler made a statement on this yesterday.

The Commission has not changed its position.

Madam President, in that case may I again ask the House to vote to refer the report back to committee.

(Parliament decided to refer the second part of the report to committee)

Report (A5-0116/2000) by Mr Bösch, on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control, on the 1998 annual report by the European Commission on protecting the Communities' financial interests and the fight against fraud (COM(1999) 590 - C5-0058/2000 - 2000/2032(COS))

(Parliament adopted the resolution)EXPLANATIONS OF VOTES

Madam President, I voted for this European Parliament directive regulating insurance against civil liability in respect of the use of motor vehicles which may injure citizens who come from States other than the State in which they are insured, but I would have liked the report to have been more audacious.

Many pensioners, with whom I often discuss matters in Italy, say to me "Mr Fatuzzo, I have had a serious car accident.

I was the victim of a road accident.

The insurance company asked me my age, and when I replied that I was 80 years old, they said 'You are worthless, you count for nothing, and so we are not going to give you any compensation.' "

Now, it does not seem right to me for a person who is 70 or 80 years old to be considered worthless, and I therefore call for care to be taken that morally acceptable payments are made when the victims of road accidents are elderly.

- The proposal for this directive deals with situations in which a traffic accident occurs in the country of residence of the person causing the accident or in a third country.

The objective of this directive is to ensure that the injured party has a right of action against the insurer of the person who caused the accident.

We must remember that we live in the European Union where the free movement of goods, persons, services and capital is in operation.

This directive which streamlines the issue of civil liability in respect of accidents involving motor vehicles is a logical extension to directives which have been put in place over the last 13 years to complete the European Single Market.

It is only right and proper where there is a system of wholesale freedom of movement of persons and cross-border traffic that a streamlined and structured procedure is in operation so that recourse is available to injured parties in the case of accidents.

To that end every insurance undertaking operating within the European Union must now appoint a representative within each Member State to be responsible for settling claims on its behalf if an accident occurs involving an EU national.

This proposal would also involve information centres being set up so as to enable victims to identify appropriate claim representatives.

A compromise has been reached between the institutions at a recent Conciliation Committee meeting which was held last March.

The most complex problem concerns the directive's territorial application. This matter is now resolved.

The directive will apply to accidents involving nationals of a Member State of the Union on Union territory or in any third country operating the Green Card system.

The Conciliation Committee has also agreed to enable Member States to retain and implement more favourable arrangements in respect of the victim than the provisions required so as to ensure compliance with this directive.

I fully support this proposal and would like to commend Mr Rothley for his work in bringing these proposals to this stage.

The European Union, as a result of the Treaty of Amsterdam, has greater powers to bring forward legislation in the field of consumer rights.

This legislation governing the issue of civil liability in respect of the use of motor vehicles and accidents in Europe will ensure that the rights of the 370 million consumers in Europe will be enhanced in the case of accidents taking place within any of the territories of the European Union.

- I welcome my Socialist colleague, Willi Rothley's recommendation on protecting motorists abroad.

We are sadly all too familiar with the high figures of road accidents across Europe.

As many as 500 000 drivers in the European Union are victims of road accidents abroad every year.

This is 500 000 too many.

We must put safety first and ensure that as much as possible is done to protect our citizens whilst travelling abroad.

The proposal extends current EU directives on the handling of motor insurance claims to cover cases where a person visiting another Member State is the victim of an accident caused by a resident of that country.

Every insurance company will, therefore, need to appoint a representative in each Member State.

The European Parliament has gone even further, calling for cover for accidents which take place in non-EU countries, provided that the vehicles involved are registered in the EU.

Under the compromise, the directive will apply to such accidents in a certain number of countries outside the European Union.

Thousands of British holidaymakers travel by car or hire cars every year in France, Spain, Portugal and many other countries in Europe.

Surely we owe all of our citizens the right to ensure that things are made as easy as possible for those involved in car accidents abroad and for their families.

This is not about high-and-mighty insurance companies hindering claims, it is about the European Parliament driving forward a lifeline for our citizens.

For my own constituents and for all of Europe's citizens, I give the green light to this proposal.

Madam President, I also voted for the measure tabled by Mr Martínez Martínez confirming aid for development cooperation with South Africa, but, also in this case, with some reserves.

Why do we not make one of our inspectors responsible, one of our Commissioners, whenever - every year - we give financial aid to South Africa?

Why do we not monitor, firstly, the use to which this financial aid is put, and, secondly, the human rights situation in South Africa?

The situation is not, of course, as bad as it was - there have been improvements - but even I have received news of all sorts of appalling acts of delinquency perpetrated in South Africa as well as elsewhere.

We should take this into account whenever we provide aid to any third countries, including South Africa.

Madam President, the situation in South Africa is difficult - and it is by no means an easy country to run.

Yet South Africa presents itself as a beacon of hope in an otherwise turbulent continent.

We should therefore be doing everything possible to assist the economic, social and democratic development of that country.

That is why I regret that the Council proposes only EUR 787.5 million for South Africa, which is effectively a 10% cut on the amounts we agreed five years ago.

Parliament, in its Amendment No 2, proposes that we give EUR 885.5 million to South Africa, EUR 98 million more than the Council.

EUR 98 million is not an insignificant sum of money in South African terms.

In terms of the European budget it is not something we would struggle to find.

I would urge that we be generous to South Africa, that the Council finds this EUR 98 million, does not go to conciliation but accepts Parliament's amendments and gets on with implementing this new regulation with South Africa.

In future, I shall ensure that the Commission remains in attendance during explanations of votes. They may then hear some interesting information.

The most scandalous aspect of what they are daring to call an agreement on "development cooperation with South Africa" is that this cooperation is subject to the trade agreement with South Africa and that the Council is using it as a means of blackmail in order to foist its own terms on Pretoria.

Such cynicism borders on candour: the European Union grants aid to South Africa on condition that it is able thereby to make a commercial profit.

Although Parliament' s proposals are, financially, better than those of the Council, we have not voted in favour of the amendments, as we do not wish to sanction this farce.

The only reason why we are not voting against the amendments, however, is to affirm our conviction that cooperation between Europe and the whole of Africa is essential.

While, however, it is designed and implemented to profit merchants, bankers and industrialists, it is of benefit only to them and, incidentally, to a select class of privileged Africans.

In these circumstances, "combating poverty" and "achieving development objectives" as mentioned by the Council is nothing but gross untruth that could not be counteracted by any vote here.

I am given to understand that Mrs Laguiller and Mrs Bordes are also involved in the explanation of vote that you have just given.

Madam President, I voted for the measure tabled by Mr Jeggle on the Commission proposals on the prices for agricultural products.

This measure deals, once again, with the European Union' s common agricultural policy.

I welcome our action to support farmers, but I feel that we need to change direction, in some cases completely and in others only in part.

For example, this measure does not contain any initiatives to support the small-scale, family-based elderly mountain farmers who operate, particularly, in the furthermost parts of Europe.

This land is increasingly being abandoned and the European Union' s vast expenditure does not go far enough towards meeting the needs of the farmers.

In future, we must pay more attention to the needs of elderly family-based farmers.

My vote is intended to support the rapporteur' s efforts but prevent the proposed reduction in the monthly increments for cereals.

The European Council stated clearly in its resolutions following the Berlin summit that the monthly increments should be maintained at the current 1 euro per tonne and frozen at this level for the entire period, i.e. from 2000 to 2006.

The planned reduction in the monthly increments would therefore clearly be breaking our promise to the farmers.

Given the worrying economic situation of the rural population, further erosion of their income is unjustifiable.

The income of people working in farming has fallen by a total of nearly 10% in real terms since 1996.

A reduction in the monthly increments would further exacerbate the economic situation of farmers.

- (SV) A transformation of agricultural policy is a prerequisite for enlargement of the European Union.

We Swedish Social Democrats (Pierre Schori, Anneli Hulthén, Jan Andersson, Maj Britt Theorin, Göran Färm and Eva Hedkvist-Petersen) therefore believe that the EU' s agricultural subsidies should be considerably reduced and we welcome the Commission' s proposal for a progressive reduction in the monthly increases in the intervention price of cereal.

Because the report opposes a reduction in the intervention price of cereal, we are voting against the Committee' s proposal.

With regard to the proposal for a Council regulation fixing certain sugar prices and the standard quality of beet for the 2000/01 marketing year, we would make the following point. The reconstruction of Kosovo is an important issue for the EU and something we wholeheartedly support.

The extra resources required for Kosovo should be obtained from general reductions in subsidies for the whole of the common agricultural policy and not only through reductions within the sugar sector.

- (DA) Agricultural aid is a heavy burden for the European Union.

It is indispensable to undertake a radical review of this aid, especially when enlargement to include the Eastern European countries is to become a reality.

I am very pleased that the first step to be taken towards such a review entails a long-term plan for a certain reduction in agricultural aid.

It is problematic, however, that there is not the courage to engage in a full and candid discussion of how our agricultural sector is, in the longer term, to cope under quite different conditions and with a quite different aid scheme than that which is in place at present.

We are forced to reduce aid to the absolute minimum, and we should have the discussion now.

On the other hand, the reduction in agricultural aid should be gradual and carried out at such a pace that there is no risk of EU aid being replaced by national schemes designed to compensate for its disappearance.

It would also be problematic if the Commission were to withdraw aid from agriculture with a view to using the resources for another purpose.

Aid should not be reduced for the wrong reasons.

Madam President, I voted against this measure on the European policy on flax and hemp.

This is because I feel that we should change the way we support and provide aid to agricultural products in the European Union.

We should start to let go of the policy of giving a sum of money to the producers of a particular agricultural product which we want to support, and endeavour, instead, to reduce the burdens of production costs, burdens which are mainly the result of national State policies and which push up the cost of labour, tying the hands of those who wish to work, produce and increase the number of jobs in their sector.

Basically, we must start to change the way we provide aid to agriculture in Europe.

Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, I voted in favour of Mrs Schierhuber' s report.

I consider proposed Amendments Nos 28 and 29 to be particularly important.

She rightly points out that any limitation on maximum quantities must correlate with actual processing capacities.

Introducing national maximum quantities as proposed by the Commission would create a system which fails to take account of national processing capacities.

The 50 tonne per annum limitation would exclude many Member States from cultivation in advance.

The aim must be to develop a flexible system which also takes account of regional sales potential, thereby allowing all Member States to cultivate on an equal footing.

(SV) We Swedish Social Democrats (Pierre Schori, Anneli Hulthén, Jan Andersson, Maj Britt Theorin, Göran Färm and Ewa Hedkvist Petersen) believe that the EU' s agricultural aid ought to be considerably reduced and we are therefore also opposed to aid for hemp production.

Furthermore, the mechanisms for supervising the cultivation of hemp are problematic because it is not possible, with the naked eye, to distinguish hemp grown for fibre from hemp grown for the production of drugs.

It is, therefore, difficult to guarantee that there is no cultivation of hemp for the purpose of manufacturing drugs.

We therefore believe that hemp production ought not to be promoted through increased aid, and we are abstaining from voting on Mrs Schierhuber' s report.

(SV) Regarding the proposal for a Council regulation (EC) No 1251/1999 establishing a support system for producers of certain arable crops to include flax and hemp grown for fibre, we would state the following. As liberals, we believe that agricultural policy should be adjusted to the market and de-bureaucratised.

If Parliament is serious about eastward enlargement, there must be a drive extensively to cut back on the costs of agriculture.

All direct forms of support for agricultural production ought gradually to be abolished.

Mr President, I have taken the floor for the last time to declare, once again, that it was with no reservations that I voted against the Bösch report on the 1998 report on the fight against fraud.

This is not because I do not approve of fighting all types of fraud - of course I do!

Naturally I support this fight. However, I feel that in order to genuinely fight fraud in the European Union we need to change Europe' s expenditure system.

The same report states that these EUR 1 019 million which have disappeared as a result of fraud are only the tip of the iceberg.

Now, we know that 10% of an iceberg is visible but the other 90% is underwater and therefore hidden.

Therefore, the European Union is being defrauded of something in the region of EUR 10 000 million.

It is absolutely essential that we change the way we spend our money.

Madam President, you have just congratulated the rapporteur on his work.

I do not see what reason there is to congratulate him as many of his original paragraphs have been dropped, particularly because of his own Group which, in its wisdom, decided to table a great many amendments to delete sections, and these were adopted.

These particularly concerned all the sections to do with the White Paper.

Consequently, many amendments which went beyond the report and the content of the report that Mr Bösch was supposed to be drawing up have been dropped.

I therefore ask the following question: why did we waste money making Mr Bösch draw up texts that have nothing to do with his work and which Parliament has, quite rightly, rejected.

You can discuss the matter with Mrs Stauner, who is very interested in other people' s reports, and whom you should really meet, and ask her if she is not interested in knowing why the members of the Committee on Budgetary Control are undertaking work which has nothing to do with their assigned tasks.

All honour and tribute, then, to the wisdom of this Parliament for restoring order.

- (DA) We have voted today in favour of Mr Bösch' s report on the more effective combating of fraud and irregularities involving EU resources.

Even though there was a slight decline in fraud and irregularities between 1997 and 1998, there is still a great need for more effective supervisory mechanisms.

Mr Kinnock' s reform plan is, on the whole, both visionary and realistic.

There are, however, a few sticking points.

Parliament has already proposed, in the Van Hulten report, that an external court should be established under the aegis of the Court of Auditors, part of whose task would be to deal with disciplinary matters and which would help recover money which had been paid out wrongly.

If such a body were to be established, this would mean that disciplinary procedures would be taken away from the Commission.

We have had a lot of bad experiences with the internal disciplinary council.

At present, officials who have had actions brought against them by the disciplinary council have colleagues of theirs sitting in judgement over them.

Both the ECHO and MED cases are all too well-known examples of this state of affairs.

We ought likewise to criticise the proposal in the white paper to the effect that an advisory panel should be set up to deal with irregularities.

We have established OLAF to deal with suspicions of fraud and irregularities.

Another panel would serve only to undermine OLAF' s powers.

We have voted against establishing a European public prosecutor' s office.

It would be a colossal enterprise to set up when the problem, in reality, lies elsewhere.

In actual fact, there is more need for a fundamental staffing reform.

It is, for all that, only the most serious cases which will have penal consequences.

Ninety per cent of cases will be disciplinary matters concerning negligence or incompetence.

Instead, there is a need for public, internal supervision and for more leeway when it comes to sacking people.

We need changes to staff regulations and to the disciplinary procedure, as also proposed in the report.

- The British Conservatives abstained on the Bösch report overall because we are unhappy with the concept of a European Public Prosecutor, believing that this could well lead to corpus juris.

We were also unhappy with the references to VAT made within the report.

- (FR) I abstained from the vote on the resolution on protecting the Communities' financial interests and the fight against fraud.

I did not wish to vote against the resolution since I fully share the rapporteur' s objectives of intensifying the combating of fraud against the financial interests of the Community.

I did not vote, however, because of the establishment of a new control body.

The Community is not going to achieve the desired goal by creating a tangled multiplicity of such bodies.

(The sitting was suspended at 12.50 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m.)

The next item is the report (A5-0117/2000) by Mrs Roth-Behrendt, on behalf of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation laying down rules for the prevention and control of certain transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (COM(1998) 623 - C4-0025/1999 - 1998/0323(COD)).

Mr President, our discussion today on transmissible spongiform encephalopathies, transmissible diseases which include BSE or scrapie, is one of the many follow-up reports or one of the follow-up discussions to the final BSE report and I think that it is also of great interest to the visitors in the gallery.

We have a report here before us which the Commission promised together with its final report on the 1997 BSE report at Parliament' s request.

We have drafted a report on it, although not as quickly as we would otherwise have done, due to the break last year.

The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and Mr Böge have drafted opinions on it.

In other words, we have been able to keep the BSE team going well.

I should like to tell you briefly how I, as rapporteur for the committee responsible, the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, assess the proposal.

The Commission' s proposal is a good one; like so much of what the Commission has presented on BSE and follow-up problems and has satisfied us in previous years, we are also satisfied with this proposal but, like most things, it still has room for improvement, Mr Byrne.

I said that your proposal on BSE testing had room for improvement and I say so again here today.

The involvement of the European Parliament certainly needs to be improved.

We must ensure that the European Parliament can act in the codecision procedure as the real guarantor of consumer and health protection in the European Union.

Only then will we have a high standard and only then will you be able to work in proper collaboration with us, because the Council of Ministers, the individual Agricultural Ministers have not exactly been at the vanguard of the movement over recent years, as we here in the House are only too aware.

It is also important, and here too another proposal needs improvement, for us to hold further discussions on the rapid BSE tests.

You tabled a proposal after this TSE proposal which you then needed to adjust, but the proposal is still inadequate.

If we are to be able to make a real appraisal of the BSE situation in the Member States, we must make it clear that fallen stock are also to be tested for human health safety in a screening process.

So far you have presented no proposal on this.

What we also need, and we have tried to achieve this in the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy and in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development, is to strengthen the Member States' obligation to inform the Commission and to give the Commission information and data on incidents in their countries, on BSE problems or on suspicious circumstances.

Here too we need to take the Member States to task more.

Here, too, I repeat: mistrust is always shown of the Member States, including my own, and rightly so.

Mr Böge rightly pointed out - as I am sure he will again in his presentation - that we need a Community definition of geographical areas.

The definition here is clearly inadequate and the Commission must explain - and I call on you to do so Mr Byrne - how it intends to deal with derogations for cosmetics, pharmaceuticals and other medicinal products.

I am convinced of the need for the Commission to make proposals in order to close any loopholes in current legislation.

Allow me to make a few comments on the proposed amendments and then, thanks to the speaking time for my group, I shall still have time for a comment at the end of the debate.

I agree with nearly all the proposed amendments, but there are some and here I would ask how you evaluate them, Mr Byrne.

This applies in particular to proposed Amendment No 50, which includes cat food in the proposal tabled by Mr Böge, who I know takes a very careful approach to everything.

But you have said that you have a problem with cat food.

Please say something about the risk of infection from cats.

Mrs Attwooll and others have proposed a number of amendments, specifically Amendments Nos 53, 54 and 55.

These proposed amendments limit the present proposal and do not represent any improvement, not even for the situation in the United Kingdom, which I would have understood.

For example, no distinction is made between breeding and fattening; that is a completely inadequate proposal.

I sympathise with the suggestion in the second part of proposed Amendment No 56 that certain materials should be removed if a Member State has a specific and efficient system, but I must also say unequivocally that, at the present stage of the discussion on special risk materials, it is a dangerous signal to Member States such as my own, which are very reticent.

Allow me to repeat quite clearly: the repercussions on the Member States have obviously been overestimated by some members in the House.

In countries which have a good, operational system and a high level of protection, this regulation will not cause any deterioration.

But in countries which do not, it would at long last force them to buckle down and give priority to safety and health protection.

That is why I fail to understand much of the mistrust of many members, but perhaps we can clear that up in the debate.

Mr President, I shall have another three minutes at the end of the debate, which I shall use to comment on some of the interventions by the honourable Members.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development also welcomes in principle the Commission proposal, which is in line with the promise made by the Commission to Parliament.

I should also like expressly to praise the excellent collaboration between the committees and the rapporteurs.

We pointed out on a previous occasion that it is strange that there are still no common provisions for fighting scrapie, despite the fact that scrapie and BSE have somehow been linked since the beginning.

We think it is important to seek a differentiated approach to preventive consumer protection by achieving an understanding of the facts and without panicking.

In addition to what the rapporteur has said, we felt it was important that the Commission had incorporated the principle of regionalising the fight against TSE in order to reconcile strict measures and a sense of proportion.

I should also like to point out that we feel it is important, in the case of the livestock affected, to have a proper discussion on how data on age can be adapted for the purpose of measures to fight TSE.

I would also add that, when we talk of the possibility of introducing tests, for example in the event of dispute between the Commission and Member States or in the event of dispute between the Commission and third countries, carrying out tests can also help to decide if a country belongs in risk category I, II or III if, for example, certain statistics cannot be organised differently.

However, I will not conceal the fact, Commissioner, that the problem of third countries in general will continue to remain an issue for us, as will the question of including pharmaceuticals and cosmetics.

We also expect the Commission to quickly submit legal provisions on animal waste, on meat meal, so that we can define safety keys, thereby ensuring that there is a future for a responsible recycling system and guaranteeing preventive consumer protection.

One issue will continue to remain on the agenda and that is the difference between some Member States and the majority of Member States in their approach to the question of what is more important: to define risk materials or to remove entire stocks from the food chain in the event of one case of BSE.

Even scientists have so far avoided committing themselves on this point.

Mr President, if the BSE crisis taught us anything, it is that health takes top priority over all other policies.

This is essentially the basis on which this proposal for a regulation has been drawn up and we really must use this opportunity to make a concerted effort to prevent, control and eradicate transmissible spongiform encephalopathies.

We have been well aware of this problem for many years now. Unfortunately, however, we have still not managed to eradicate the disease, nor have we managed to identify all the causes for it, hence all the concerns, restrictions and irregularities in the production and marketing of products of animal origin.

It is therefore essential that action be taken throughout the Community so that firstly: we can effectively guarantee public health protection and, secondly, we can restore consumer confidence which, in turn, will help the internal market to develop and operate properly.

One of the important measures recommended in the regulation is the establishment of rapid diagnosis tests, because rapid detection is one of the keys to combating this disease.

Consequently, these tests, which produce results within a relatively short period of time, will most certainly help us to take immediate and appropriate action.

Three tests have already been proposed, although we predict that we shall see future improvements in this area, together with rapid diagnosis tests on live animals, so that we can monitor better how the whole epidemiological picture of transmissible spongiform encephalopathies is developing in the European Union.

A second key measure is to establish an ongoing epidemiological study based partly on laboratory tests using an established protocol.

The introduction of uniform procedures and truly comparable results from analyses by national and Community reference laboratories will help us to monitor the situation closely and to create reliable scientific data and methods of diagnosis which include rapid diagnostic tests.

It would be a good idea if, at the same time, we monitored scientific progress on the new variant disease, Creutzfeldt-Jakob, which, as we all know, attacks humans and is caused by food from animals contaminated with BSE.

Finally, the slightest suspicion of any form of spongiform encephalopathy in any animal must be notified to the competent authorities so that we can take appropriate action.

I should like to stress at this point, that in my view, we will in fact only eradicate the disease effectively if we destroy the whole herd, regardless of how much this would cost both in economic and sentimental terms.

That is why the compensation paid by the Commission to beneficiaries must be quite substantial.

Of course, it is hard when just one animal out of a whole herd is sick, as it is very difficult to discern if there are animals which appear healthy but which may fall ill later on.

That is precisely why we are proposing this measure.

"Prevention is better than cure" , as Hippocrates said all those years ago, thereby paving the way for preventive medicine. This is particularly true today, given that there is no cure either for BSE or for the equivalent human disease, the new variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob.

In closing, I should like to commend and thank both Mr Böge, the rapporteur for the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development, and Mrs Roth-Behrendt, the rapporteur for the Committee on the Environment.

Thanks to their cooperation and with the help of all their other colleagues, I feel this is truly a much better regulation, and is a vast improvement on what the Commission originally presented to Parliament.

Mr President, I also wish to endorse and praise the work of Mrs Roth-Behrendt and Mr Böge on this issue and the initial proposals from the Commission.

Safety must be a priority and we all understand that if we are to have equal precautions throughout the Member States, we need a variety of measures in place which have not so far been instituted.

Commissioner Byrne is to be congratulated on moving that closer.

These proposals take us a good deal further down the line in the field of diagnostic testing, in a more sceptical attitude to animals which ought to have been under suspicion but in some Member States were not, and in terms of the general prospect of fallen stock being tested for the possibility of BSE.

I want to say something, however, coming from the Member State which first suffered the full rigours of BSE and which has also, as a result of that, been in the vanguard of cleaning up this problem.

We have now had for a considerable period of time in the United Kingdom an over-30-month cull of all animals which have been taken out of the food chain.

We have been able to tackle the problem of the possibility of maternal transmission by also taking out those animals that might be at risk because of their ancestry.

From our position, given the measures we take, we do not see any reason at all why we would need to introduce, additionally, whole-herd slaughter of the kind done in some other countries.

We are being asked not just for a belt-and-braces policy but also to buy a new pair of trousers just in case. This would cost a great deal of money.

It would not remove a single additional suspect case of BSE.

I would remind those present that, with our additional safety measures, we in the UK are only exporting to the Community de-boned carcasses which have gone through maximum checks and security.

In the circumstances, therefore, there are a number of amendments tabled by a variety of Members in the United Kingdom which I would commend in this debate.

I should be very glad to hear whether the Commissioner feels he can accept that in some circumstances - particularly in view of the over-30-month cull in the United Kingdom - for those countries which are admittedly very high risk but also with a very high level of precaution now in place a certain number of derogations are necessary and would be satisfactory to him.

Mr President, I would first of all address the Commissioner and say that I naturally welcome the present proposal.

Secondly, I want to congratulate Mrs Roth-Behrendt on a very good piece of work.

I also want to thank Mr Böge.

I wish to support in principle all the amendments from the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Protection.

Nowadays, we know a very great deal indeed about the living world.

Life is not, however, complete, as it were, but is evolving all the time.

It is evolving not only in a positive way, but also in a negative way.

As time goes on, we are faced with new viruses and new problems.

The BSE crisis is an example of such a phenomenon.

There are, however, also many more examples.

There are therefore two things which must be done.

The first is the matter with which we are occupied at present, namely trying to ensure that we get the better both of BSE and of TSE, which is, of course, a broader concept.

We must make sure that the situation does not occur again.

However, we must also find ways of overcoming similar tragedies in the future.

Such tragedies will clearly not occur in precisely this area but will crop up elsewhere.

This illustrates what the present debate teaches us: that we must have comprehensive regulations for the whole of the common market constituted by the EU.

We must have the same rules, monitored in the same way.

Everyone must be treated the same.

Understandable differences in attitudes have emerged in the course of the debates which we have conducted in the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy and in the party groups and which are also being conducted here and now in this Chamber.

I am thinking of the last intervention.

The United Kingdom has been affected badly.

I can well understand why people there have points of view as to how it might perhaps be possible to make savings.

Allow me, however, to say something which is extremely important.

We must never suffer for having looked to short-term economic gains at the risk of long-term security.

There is a danger of the short-term economy' s taking over at the expense of reason and caution.

To my party colleague, Mrs Attwooll, I have to say that I understand the current amendments very well but that I cannot support them.

That would mean our becoming unclear and sending out false signals.

I believe it is extremely important that when, in this context, we decide about this report, we send out a crystal clear signal about the firmness of our judgement on the issue of food safety.

This is important prior to the forthcoming debate on the whole project entailed in the white paper which has been announced.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, Mrs Roth-Behrendt, according to a Flemish saying, prevention is better than cure, and I assume that this pearl of wisdom is used in each of our Member States and regions.

I would like to expressly congratulate Mrs Roth-Behrendt on her report.

My group has not tabled any amendments and is in full agreement with you. We give you our full support and have every confidence in you.

After all, the proposal follows on from a pledge which was made previously regarding the follow-up committee. This is therefore to be welcomed.

I would like to home in on the following issues.

Firstly, it makes sense to include regionalisation and regional differentiation in the goal-oriented fight against TSE. If you are in any doubt about this, just ask my Scottish and Welsh colleagues.

Secondly, there are tests for a rapid diagnosis and to identify TSE in cattle.

We, as Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Protection want to make these methods available so as to improve our monitoring procedures, and rightly so.

As it happens, we all know that these tests are not yet scientifically accurate and that when these tests are applied, we do not know precisely whether infection actually occurs at each stage of the disease. I believe that these tests are at least heading in the right direction and that we should support the scientific research carried out in this field.

Thirdly, I welcome the requirement to destroy or remove the entire herd on farms where the disease has broken out.

Fourthly, there is indeed a need for additional legislation for products such as cosmetics, medicines and pharmaceutical preparations which are excluded from the present proposal.

Finally, I would like to draw your attention to a number of amendments which actually provide for a number of points to be lifted from the appendix and included in the body of the text.

I think that it is important to bring about more democracy, to get away from comitology, and to increase parliamentary control.

These are cardinal amendments, to my mind.

Mr President, the proposal for a regulation under discussion does not aim to address the problems, as the Commission hypocritically claims, but to cover up the problems which have arisen in certain countries, thereby generalising them and making them everybody' s problem.

This is why this proposal needs to be changed, particularly where it specifies classifying countries into categories.

If the Commission really wanted to protect public health from spongiform encephalopathies, it would have proposed rules to prevent such risks a long time ago, but it did not.

It would have made provision for the necessary procedures and penalties.

But the interests of multinational food corporations, which have subjugated everything to the rationale of excessive profit, precluded any such action.

So, this Commission initiative only made its appearance once the situation had got out of control - with dioxin for example - and is now endeavouring to show that it has some control over the situation.

The conclusion which we draw from this draft regulation is that it is probably an attempt to cover up the situation.

That is the direction in which things are heading with the classification of countries, which, rather than taking into account the most basic factor, which is the existence or non-existence of cases of encephalopathy in their raised cattle, takes account of other factors when allocating countries to a particular category.

The worst thing about this is that, theoretically, if a member state in which cases of encephalopathy have been reported can prove that it has established systems for monitoring production, it could be placed in the same category as a country in which no cases have ever been reported.

This same spirit, this "lowest common denominator" approach, pervades the rest of the proposed measures, such as the mandatory removal of various organs (spleen, brain, spinal cord, etc.).

Such measures will blacken the reputation of meat-producing countries in which there have been no cases of encephalopathy and will also discredit sheepmeat and goatmeat, since there is no substantial scientific evidence as to whether this meat is sensitive to spongiform encephalopathy pathogens.

At the same time, the proposal to remove the aforementioned organs and tissues is a recipe for disaster for sheep- and goatmeat, which will be impossible to market; in other words, this measure will indirectly oust sheep and goat meat from the market, demand will be met by other types of meat from larger animals and traditional recipes using offal such as intestines and spleen will be banned.

We therefore oppose the Commission proposal.

Mr President, I welcome the opportunity of making a brief contribution to this debate and I congratulate the rapporteur on her excellent work.

Parliament has certainly devoted considerable time on behalf of its citizens to addressing the important agenda of food safety, while at the same time ensuring that our farmers can operate within a production framework of traceability which is the only way to fully restore consumer confidence in the wide range of quality food products produced by European farmers.

For this reason, the creation of a uniform legal basis for controlling and preventing the spread of BSE and scrapie is paramount and there is still, as other speakers have suggested, a lack of consistency in relation to the application of the regulations within individual Member States.

I would urge Commissioner Byrne to prioritise introduction of that level of consistency which is the only way that we can convince our consumers that we have a common policy in relation to ensuring public health.

As I have said in previous debates, farmers are the victims of circumstances beyond their control and those responsible for the manufacture of animal feed which puts public health, our entire livestock sector and indeed farm incomes at risk, have much to answer for.

This House must be vigilant in ensuring that it can never again be repeated.

I welcome the availability of rapid diagnostic testing for improved detection of TSEs in cattle and believe, Commissioner, that further consideration should be given to its use as a means of establishing the health status of animals in Member States.

For my country, Ireland, food exports and in particular beef are of paramount importance to our economy and the income of farmers.

I can say that we have left no stone unturned in tackling this problem, including the removal of entire herds where an infected animal has in fact been diagnosed.

May I say in conclusion that farmers have always responded in a positive way to the introduction of regulations governing public health and the health status of animals raised for food production.

Their task as guarantors of food security and quality is, as everyone in this House knows, becoming increasingly difficult.

Far too often their contribution to society has been taken for granted and certainly not always adequately rewarded with a reasonable income.

Mr President, Mrs Roth-Behrendt, Mr Böge, Commissioner, we have before us a proposal for a regulation on the prevention of transmissible spongiform encephalopathies, which is to say degeneration of the brain in bovine animals, sheep, primates, antelope, cats and even humans, since there have been 53 cases of atypical Creutzfeldt-Jakob in Great Britain, all fatal.

So now we are going to adopt regulations to prevent an epidemic that we have known about since 1986, i.e. for fourteen years.

It is rather late in the day to react, but even so over the last fourteen years we have done a great deal. Last month, for example, we decided to stick labels on meat to warn consumers.

The Commission told us that it was impossible to enforce such labelling before 2002, sixteen years after the outbreak of the disease, but we have done something all the same.

We have had discussions with Mr Delors, with Mr Santer, with Mr Prodi, with Mr McSharry, the Commissioner responsible for agriculture, then Mr Steichen, and Mr Fischler.

We have set up a committee of inquiry chaired by our fellow Member, Mr Böge, a temporary monitoring committee; we have even tabled a motion of censure, against Mr Böge' s wishes. We have heard expert opinions from Mr Dirringer, the German virologist, Mr Picoud, Mr Dormont, Scottish specialists, our Portuguese fellow Member, Garcia, was a specialist.

We have had debates, topical and urgent questions on the embargo, etc.

After fourteen years of discussion, there are few survivors of this war of nigh on twenty years - Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf, Mr Cunha, Mr Böge, and myself. Mr Happart left us and Mr Pagel died.

So I think it would be useful for the more recent Members, in the end, if I gave a sort of debriefing on the subject, quite apart from the problems with the legal basis under Article 100 A or BSE monitoring problems.

The starting point for this business was the 1984 milk quotas.

To improve their milk reference, our British friends drove their cows like some sort of engines, overfeeding them, and, in order to save on the cost of fodder, they fed their cows on meal made from carcasses.

Then, again, to save fuel oil when manufacturing meal, they reduced the cooking temperature, thereby enabling the pathogen to survive. BSE is the tragic product of the race for profits and the British farm model.

The disease has been identified since 1986, but nothing much was done until 1996.

The public could not be thrown into a panic because the Maastricht Treaty had to be sold to them.

So the press, the Commission and the European Parliament all knew about it, but did not say a word.

So when, in March 1996, the British, via the British Ministers for Agriculture and Health, admitted that the disease could be transmitted to human beings, the necessary measures were not taken.

Because this time the reason the public could not be thrown into a panic was no longer to sell the Maastricht Treaty but the Treaty of Amsterdam.

So, met first with silence and then with lies, the epidemic spread and we all know what the outcome of that was.

In the first place, BSE has not been eradicated in Great Britain, and will not be eradicated.

Secondly, the belated ban on meal did not serve to eradicate contamination.

Thirdly, either contamination crossed over to the meal fed to poultry, or there is a third transmission route.

In addition to maternal contamination, there may be transmission via the fields, the grazing land, the grass, and there may be badlands, as in the case of ovine scrapie, where the prion would be encysted and would return as soon as bovine animals were put to pasture there.

Fourthly, Great Britain and the industrialists causing the contamination have not, as polluters, paid.

It is innocent farmers, grain farmers, who are paying the price, in the same way that the farmers are paying for Kosovo.

All in all, then, the directive and the regulation are all well and good, but they are somewhat hypocritical.

We all agree that we need regulations on prevention, we are all agreed on adopting the amendments from the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development, to whom the matter should have been referred.

We all agree that scientific measures are needed, methods to be used in abattoirs to remove the ilia, the ganglia, the duodena, the inguinal, medial, lateral, renal, prefemoral and cervical lymph nodes, but this is not the key issue.

In the BSE crisis, at the moment of truth, when protective action had to be taken, it was taken by the national states.

That is the main lesson to be learnt from the TSE business.

Firstly, protection is always led by the states.

Secondly, the precautionary principle means safeguarding nations.

This is no obstacle to the construction of Europe but, like children making tree houses, it is just a game.

That is what we are doing here, Mr President, all playing out together.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, the rationale of maximising profits leads to all sorts of aberrations, including feeding herbivores on meat-based meal.

It is not just the cows that went mad, and as a result, ovine scrapie spread to bovine animals in the form of BSE.

Consumer welfare demands that we use every means possible to prevent and vigorously combat these diseases and their vectors.

The action taken in 1997 is now proving even more inadequate as scientists are today talking about a third transmission route.

We must therefore provide ourselves with effective means to eradicate transmissible spongiform encephalopathies once and for all, if at all possible. This means coordinating and dealing with the sector as soon as waste is used in animal fodder, destroying at-risk materials if there is suspicion, banning the inclusion of animal protein in cattle fodder, demanding traceability by labelling the animal' s site of birth and rearing, and, at Member State level, setting up the local monitoring systems which are the only ways to guarantee that the campaign will be effective and that monitoring will be transparent, setting in place a fast, systematic screening procedure and also in-depth checks, if necessary.

Finally, the whole herd must be slaughtered if one beast is found to be infected.

This is the price of food safety, but it must not be used as an excuse to cast doubt on the transportation of live animals.

Mr President, in stressing the excellent quality of the work carried out by Mrs Roth-Behrendt and Mr Böge, I would like to dwell on one aspect and take advantage of the presence of Commissioner Byrne.

Clearly, our goal has to be total elimination, but we feel that this would be extremely difficult as the costs of incinerating the large numbers of animals which die on farms are objectively huge.

Consequently, the economic burdens and the amount of technical organisation involved could be extensive, and so could the environmental impact of such large-scale incineration carried out at extremely high temperatures.

In this sense, we ought to ask the Commission - and insist on a reply - whether realistic estimates of the quantities of material to be incinerated are already available to us, whether they have already been made or whether this still remains to be done, according to the various classification procedures of the States, together with an evaluation of the resulting organisational economic burdens, with subsequent referral to Parliament.

It is therefore essential to prevent the adoption of different, uncoordinated paths by individual Member States from causing substantial distortion of competition and disproportion in the treatment reserved for producers.

It is necessary to provide for the adoption of harmonised financial support measures, lay down common organisational guidelines and use applied research measures to develop new disposal technologies with less environmental impact which allow the use of forms of materials recycling which respect consumer safety requirements.

The development of common guidelines should allow firmer, more balanced and, therefore, more effective responses.

For example, we consider that setting up mandatory disposal consortia according to the model already laid down by the legislation of some Member States could be a practical response to the need to limit the economic impact of disposal operations on breeders and, at the same time, thanks to the increase in the degree of social control over the proper use of the service, to the need to consolidate consumer and environmental guarantees.

We conclude that the adoption of the excellent regulation in question will require the development of a combination of initiatives, research and analysis, but also regulation and standardisation, and we hope that Parliament will associate itself with these measures.

Mr President, we have before us a very important directive, aimed at creating a uniform legal basis for the prevention and control of TSEs.

The objective is to gather into one dossier all regulations relating to TSEs to date.

If we are to restore consumer confidence, it is essential that we do all we possibly can at all levels.

I should particularly like to thank the rapporteur, Mrs Roth-Behrendt, for the vigour she has shown in her approach to this matter - many of her proposals deserve agreement.

Mr Böge, for his part, has ensured that these views will gain wide support in this Chamber.

I agree that the Commission for its part has done a good job, a job that Parliament can endorse, whereas Member States must eventually be made to understand that this matter is important and that we must gain consumer confidence.

I should, however, like to draw your attention to one more issue: those countries and farms, which have escaped the animal diseases, must also be able to ensure that they will not have these problems in future.

It is therefore essential that the withdrawal period relating to the transfer of animals from one farm to another be increased from two years to six years.

On the whole, we must firmly hold to the notion that within the internal market, too, human health is the most important thing, and that principles of free competition only take second place.

It is imperative that we bear this in mind, particularly when dealing with these food matters, which are all-important to consumers.

Mr President, Commissioner, I too would like to offer my congratulations to Mrs Roth-Behrendt on her report and to thank her for her openness to discussion on the issues involved.

She will appreciate even better than I how far scientific opinion on TSEs has developed.

For example, the Scientific Steering Committee has recently established that it is necessary to regard the vertebral column and dorsal root ganglion as specified risk material in the UK only for bovines over 30 months and in Portugal only for those over 6 months.

That is why some of us seek an Amendment No 56 to allow adjustments in this area on the advice of the Scientific Steering Committee rather than requiring fresh legislation to implement them.

Similarly, certain measures in combating TSEs have already proved effective.

I refer to the exclusion of animals over 30 months from the food chain, the slaughter and disposal of suspects and offspring of BSE cases, a fully effective feed ban and the removal of a wide range of specified risk materials.

Where such measures are in place, in seems unnecessary to impose the more technical requirement of the date-based export scheme and the certified animal scheme to the domestic market; hence, Amendment No 53.

In addition, given that there is no evidence of horizontal transmission of TSEs, there would seem to be no scientific requirement for whole-herd slaughter.

While accepting that some Member States may wish to engage in the practice, I would submit that it should not be compulsory.

Indeed, we take TSE and BSE very seriously in the United Kingdom.

We are committed to the safety of the public and to animal welfare.

We only ask that given that we have taken these measures which we believe to be effective, you do not ask to us to take additional measures which have no scientific justification for them.

Mr President, Mrs Roth-Behrendt' s report seeks to strengthen consumer protection measures but also to extend Parliament' s scope of action, by ensuring that all issues crucial to the prevention of TSEs are included in the regulatory instrument, not just in the annexes which are not covered by the codecision procedure.

This twofold concern seems to be particularly justified today, as French experience shows.

The fact is that considering the range of measures already undertaken, such as the ban on animal-protein meal for bovine animals, the incidence of mad cow disease in France should have started to decline, but this is not the case, and in fact the number of cases is on the increase.

It is this tendency which presents a problem right now, much more than the scale of the epidemic in quantitative terms.

The truth is, at the present time, there is quite simply no adequate explanation for it, hence the debate which has been initiated on the possible existence of alternative disease transmission routes of which we are, as yet, unaware.

Medical and scientific uncertainty still prevails.

In these circumstances, the precautionary principle must be adopted to the full.

All possible resources must be used in order to assess the BSE situation in the various countries, particularly including the development and systematic use of fast screening tests.

The development of BSE in France raises issues that are not purely medical in the narrowest sense.

From the very beginning, it has not been possible to give any explanation for the emergence of this disease and its transmission to human beings, and its spread internationally, without taking the key socio-economic factors into account: contemporary trends in the agro-industry, the subordination of producers and consumers to the dominating rationale of capitalistic profit.

Still today, the way in which the agro-industry is organised, and the fact that it is infiltrated by international mafia-like networks, make the fight to eradicate BSE and TSEs even more difficult.

No public health policy should ignore these factors.

They are, however, discussed only on rare occasions and in little detail by the European institutions, including Parliament.

Basically, BSE is one of those medical matters which, in practical and terribly human terms, bears witness to the acute nature of the choices that society makes, and that is yet another reason why preventing TSEs is a political matter to which Parliament' s responsibility is truly committed.

Mr President, as an MEP representing a farming area, I have first-hand experience of how devastating the BSE crisis has been to British agriculture.

I can also vouch for the necessity of maintaining effective controls.

You might therefore expect me to be enthusiastic about these new controls on BSE, but I am not.

We already have enough and I believe they are adequate and effective.

This proposal simply adds more red tape and costs to an already overburdened industry.

Of course, I have no objections to other countries adopting measures which match ours.

In fact, it would be helpful if measures already in place in the UK were implemented throughout the EU and elsewhere.

Thus it is not new laws we need - we need more compliance.

Until all Member States are able to assure us that there is full compliance, this proposal, if passed, will simply add to the list of laws which have not been implemented.

In any case, if more controls were needed, we should not be looking to the Commission for guidance.

The British BSE inquiry which was commissioned by the UK Government at a cost of £20 million is due to report in November.

We should wait to see what this inquiry says.

Mr President, first of all I should like to add my voice to the congratulations addressed to our rapporteurs, particularly Mrs Roth-Behrendt.

Her approach and hence her report is one we can wholeheartedly support.

This regulation is not a major revolution, but it does attempt nonetheless to afford a higher level of protection, based, moreover, on the most stringent practices adopted in specific European Union countries, such as in France.

I should, however, like to draw your attention to a number of specific points and, firstly, the existence of a third transmission route which is now practically certain.

I think it essential in this case to define suspect animals quite apart from the age criterion.

The age criterion ceases to be justified as soon as we are practically assured that this third transmission route does in fact exist.

The important thing, then, is to have systematic recourse to testing whenever an animal dies of unknown causes.

Systematic testing precludes fraud and makes it possible to offer better guarantees.

The issue of slaughtering herds has been discussed at length.

In both France and Germany the whole herd is slaughtered if a single animal is found to be diseased.

We know that this is not the practice in Great Britain, and that this is a solution which is vigorously opposed by our fellow Members from the United Kingdom.

But is it possible to put the argument of the costs of destroying a herd when a public health issue is involved?

I think this is not a tenable position.

It is important for the regulations of the various countries of the European Union to be harmonised.

I should, finally, like to talk about at-risk materials, these notorious substances which may present risks.

Once again, in France, a number of measures have been implemented, which have been more or less understood, but I am convinced that it is essential to be extremely vigilant and to apply the precautionary principle.

So this regulation is a good one.

It represents some progress, but it is capable of being perfected rather than perfect as it stands.

It does not raise any questions concerning the incineration of animal-based meal.

In some of our countries, we have stockpiles of such meal which we do not yet know how best to destroy, or which has not been destroyed sufficiently, and also animal-based meal used for swine and poultry.

I think, Commissioner, that these are questions we also have to ask.

Mr President, I asked to be allowed to speak again at the end of the debate - we are not quite at the end.

Allow me to say a few words on the debate.

I would like to thank the honourable Members who have spoken so far, and Mrs Doyle, Mr Goodwill and Mr Nicholson, who have yet to speak, for what they have to say and for the fair treatment we are giving each other.

Those who sat in Parliament during the last parliamentary term know that it is Parliament which has cause to be proud of having got a grip on the BSE disaster in the individual committees and in the House as a whole, in a way which cut across the political divide.

I tried at all times, as chair of the committee, to be fair to all the Member States, strict but fair, as my teachers always used to say to me, and I am trying to do the same now.

Allow me therefore to say a few words on some of the points raised.

Yes, Mr Trakatellis and others are right, Mr Staes.

We still have no tests for live animals.

We still have no tests for very early infection, which is why the Commission is being called upon to keep on working on this, and I know that it is doing so.

Mr Whitehead said quite clearly that safety must be a priority, but he would, of course, like the precautionary principle to be applied in equal measure in other Member States and that is the main point here.

To some members who have spoken or who have perhaps yet to speak I should like to state one thing quite clearly: we are legislating here for the whole of the European Union, for the 15 Member States with widely varying safety levels.

We are not legislating just for Great Britain.

We know that the data-based export scheme, that the OTS over-30-month scheme, that all these things are important and are working.

I am the first to recognise what Great Britain has achieved and at what price to farmers.

I have spoken to countless officials and farmers' representatives in Great Britain over recent years and I know that.

Nonetheless, I must ensure that this level of safety also applies to Italy, Germany and all the other countries in the European Union.

Which is why I believe that this regulation is a good regulation.

When Mrs Attwooll and others ask if we can have derogations for countries which are already that good and if they must still remove the spinal column, then I call on you, Mr Byrne, to table a proper list of derogations to the Council saying countries A, B, C and D comply and are exempt from certain measures.

I will be the first to support it.

But I do not want this to be rushed, as is the case with certain proposed amendments.

This is why I stand by the position which I described earlier. I think that we really should stick with what we discussed in committee and with what Mrs Doyle and I have re-tabled.

This particularly applies to proposed Amendment No 56, to which Mrs Attwooll referred.

I will be the first to support this at second reading, if the Council makes the proposal, but we need to list clearly and to substantiate clearly where derogations are possible and under what conditions and for which Member State.

What must the Member State do to qualify?

And of course I support Mrs Grossetête: naturally, tests must be carried out on animals which have died from unknown causes but that is already included in the Commission' s proposal on the tests.

Mr President, at the outset I would like to add my thanks to Mrs Roth-Berendt and indeed Mr Böge for their commitment to this important issue.

For some time Parliament, the Commission and Member States have sought the introduction of common EU-wide rules to deal with the problems of TSEs such as BSE in cattle and scrapie in sheep.

The basis of this proposal is that the discovery of any TSE or the first incidence of BSE in a Member State would be covered by common rules which would take effect automatically.

To date, many of the actions taken to deal with BSE have been carried out on a unilateral basis by Members using national measures.

The TSE proposal being put forward includes, among other things, a requirement for educational programmes for farmers, vets and officials; the removal of a list of specified risk material, an active surveillance programme using rapid post-mortem tests; and the strengthening of the ban on the feeding of mammalian protein to ruminant animals.

The proposal also allows for the culling of animals and the compensation to farmers for loss of culled animals.

The principle of this approach cannot be faulted.

Common rules will enhance the protection of animal health and more importantly will ensure protection of the consumer by ensuring that the highest standards of disease prevention and eradication are put in place in every Member State and can be activated when appropriate.

These rules will form a blueprint that can be followed in the event of any new scientific information being made available or if more radical action is required.

However, I am aware, Commissioner, that the vast majority of Member States are of the opinion that the classification of countries for SRM removal purposes should be based on an internationally recognised code set out and agreed by the EU and the many - over 150 third countries - under the auspices of the OIE, the World Organisation of Animal Health, which is based in Paris.

Most Member States are uneasy about the approach being taken by the scientific sub-groups and would prefer a more open and transparent system of classification as set out in the OIE code which is recognised and accepted by countries worldwide.

This view was made plain in Council working groups and was reflected in the final draft Presidency Proposal, a draft that is supported by the vast majority of Member States.

For the purpose of agreement and the speedy implementation of this regulation and hopefully to avoid a lengthy conciliation process, the use of common OIE criteria would be appropriate.

Having discussed this with Mrs Roth-Berendt, we have tabled Amendment No 51 to Article 5 as a compromise to this effect.

I welcome the principle of laying down common rules for the prevention and control of transmissible spongiform encephalopathies.

However, this proposal may have negative consequences for countries trading in sheep and this is an important point as it currently stands.

There is a view that there should be separate rules for scrapie rather than the current mix of rules where the treatment of SRM in sheep depends on the BSE incidence in that particular country.

I would reiterate in conclusion my support for the use of OIE provisions to have an internationally recognised basis for classification, a basis supported by 150 countries in resolving world trade disputes and recognised by the WTO.

I make no case for leniency of treatment at all.

The UK would be in class 4, Ireland would be in class 3 under either classification system, the SSC or the OIE.

The OIE meets next week in Paris to consider amendments to their classification system and consequently I hope to bring further amendments to this regulation for second reading.

Mr President, legislation which seeks to protect the public from a terrible brain disease such as new variant CJD should be drafted to complement measures already in place in Member States, to recognise the stage of the epidemic that we are at and have due regard to the body of scientific knowledge we have built up.

The United Kingdom already has comprehensive and effective measures in place to protect human health and eradicate BSE in our herd.

Cases of BSE are declining rapidly.

But most importantly, so far, we have not had a case in an animal born since the complete feed ban was introduced.

That should be happening around about now, if it was going to.

No older animals over 30 months of age enter the food chain.

It is likely that cases may occur due to maternal transmission but these will be isolated and not feed-related, and there is no justification for a return to cohort culling.

Incidentally - and Mrs Grossetête referred to this - there has been recent press speculation about a third possible infection route through grass contaminated by faecal material.

This only applies - as I understand - to animals excreting pathogens ingested with contaminated feed, not, as some newspapers inferred, from animals incubating or suffering from this disease.

I am concerned about the practicality and cost of having to post-mortem all animals for which the cause of death is unknown.

Very large numbers of animals die of natural causes or common ailments.

BSE is a degenerative disease which does not cause sudden death anyway.

Amendment No 26 seeks universally to impose the whole-herd slaughter policy which some Member States with low levels of incidence have introduced in an attempt to reassure the public.

This could well result in the under-reporting of cases, as we have seen in Switzerland recently.

BSE is not an infectious disease that is transmitted horizontally.

Whole-herd slaughter has no scientific justification.

The majority of herds that have experienced BSE in the UK have had only one or two isolated cases.

Most herds in Britain are not closed herds and therefore animals come in from all over the place.

If one of those animals gets a disease, why kill the whole herd?

Whole-herd slaughter is not an effective way of reducing cases of BSE.

It would cost a small fortune for no tangible benefit.

I hope Parliament, in amending this directive, will do so in the light of sound scientific advice, not as a knee-jerk reaction to tabloid newspaper scare stories.

It is my pleasure to give the floor to a Member of Parliament who received the title of Great Chief of Rangatira, when he led our delegation to New Zealand.

Mr President, I will omit replying to that particular remark.

Can I first of all thank you very much for giving me the floor and can I pay tribute to the rapporteur and indeed to Mr Böge.

As someone who was in the last Parliament I know how much thankless time and effort they have put in since BSE first began in a very difficult area to try and find a resolution and a way forward to help everyone in a very sensible way.

I think both of them not only take credit for themselves but indeed bring credit to this Parliament for the way in which they have carried out that duty.

BSE has unfortunately been with us for some considerable time and I suspect that we have to recognise that it will probably be with us for some years ahead.

We have to try to find ways by which we can control the disease of BSE and TSE and at the same time create the consumer confidence that is needed because consumer confidence has been lost.

With respect to Mr Martinez I will only say one word to him - sludge.

I will say no more as far as that is concerned.

Everybody has problems in the European Union of one type or the other and no-one should try to make or take advantage of the other's problem.

However, whatever we do, we should not overburden the producer because he has already been considerably overburdened.

As to the argument whether you slaughter the whole of the herd, there is no scientific evidence to say you should.

There are many instances in my area where maybe BSE occurred five, six or seven years ago in one animal and there has never been another case since.

Once we get to the stage where we have a vaccine or some way of identifying or testing if an animal has BSE, then there is an argument for testing the rest of the herd and if there is a trigger level whereby it goes beyond that, then the whole herd should be taken out.

But it would be wilful carnage to simply go in and slaughter good animals in the thought or the notion that BSE may possibly be in the whole herd.

That would be a drastic approach.

One other point: where I come from, in recent years there has been a continuing downward trend.

Indeed, in Northern Ireland last year, we only had, I think, three identifiable cases of BSE and the projection for this year is one or at worst maybe two.

I was listening to what the rapporteur said that if there are clear reasons then she would agree for areas that have low instances of BSE to have certain controls and mechanisms.

That is an important thing to recognise because in my area farmers feel very secure because of the very low instances we have of BSE and because of the strict controls that we have monitored and made sure worked over recent years.

That is perhaps why our situation is much better than the rest of the United Kingdom.

This is an area which has to be looked at in the months ahead - we must create the confidence within ourselves that we can begin to move forward as we begin, hopefully, to see the back of the TSE/BSE problem.

Mr President, I would like to join in the congratulations to the rapporteur on her excellent report.

The report that we now have before us is an example of the kind of issue which requires of us the ability to demonstrate that the European Parliament places public health before internal market considerations.

The EC Treaty - for instance, Article 30 and points 4 and 8 of Article 95 of that Treaty - presents us with both the opportunity and the duty to do so.

The priority is to protect consumer health, particularly against diseases like TSE, the mode of infection of which is not adequately known and the testing of which so far is only possible after the symptoms have developed.

Secondarily - and this is justified by the notion of the internal market - we must be able to restore consumer confidence in the foods on the market in order to enable the market to function with a minimum of disruption.

Both issues are important, but we must be able to show clearly the priority of values; public health comes first.

The Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy has adopted a position that allows both of these objectives to be met.

One important aspect of this view is the whole-herd slaughter on a farm where disease has been discovered.

Even without knowledge of whether any of the other animals have become infected, this action is nevertheless justifiable, precisely in order for the above objectives to be met.

At the same time, we must, of course, ensure that the breeder receives proper compensation for his livestock.

In addition, the internal market must be able to operate in such a way that the spread of the disease is checked, and so that Member States, where no disease has yet occurred, can rely on the Community to protect the animal population of those States.

In the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, I prepared a proposal for an amendment on this matter myself, stating as reasons for the issue specifically the above-mentioned prioritisation of values, where public health is the first.

This objective has now been met in the Committee report - in a slightly different, but nevertheless satisfactory manner.

Extending the period referred to in the Annex to the Regulation (the scrapie-free period) from two years to six, may be an adequate means of ensuring that the imported animals and processed material are risk-free, and of preventing the spread of the disease to countries where it does not yet exist.

Contrary to the Commission' s proposal, the report refers to instant tests, which are being used to detect TSE, by name.

This in itself is acceptable, but we must bear in mind that we are dealing with a technology which is continually being developed.

Hopefully, better tests than the current ones will soon be available, and when the time comes, it will be important that the currently approved regulations are kept up to date with the advances in technology.

Mr President, I am pleased to outline our position on your amendments to our proposed regulation on the prevention and control of TSEs.

I wish to begin by thanking you for the excellent cooperation between your assistants and my services.

Due to this thorough preparation I am in a position today to agree in full or in part to almost three-quarters of your proposed amendments.

Furthermore, most of the amendments, which I am not in a position to accept, relate to two issues: the so-called "whereas" clauses - that is the recitals - and whether or not changes to certain provisions of the regulation should be by commitology or codecision.

That is an issue which I have referred to before.

I know it is a controversial issue and I look forward to discussing this particular issue in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development which is scheduled for July.

In substance, therefore, the Commission and Parliament are equally committed to a strong regulation which puts in place a comprehensive framework to tackle TSEs.

I should like especially to thank Mrs Roth-Behrendt and Mr Böge for their huge contribution to this proposal.

I can think of no other individuals who have made such a positive contribution to tackling BSE.

They have both rendered an enormous service to the health protection of Europe's citizens.

I might also add that this piece of legislation is an excellent example of the good work and cooperation which has taken place between our two institutions and could provide a precedent for the future.

I turn now to the specific amendments and formal Commission position.

Firstly, on commitology, we accept Amendments Nos 6, 11, 12, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35 and 36.

With regard to the recitals, I also accept Amendments Nos 3, 4 and 5.

However, I cannot accept Amendments Nos 1 and 2 because it is inappropriate to introduce recitals in a piece of legislation which are not matched by substantive provisions in the text.

However, I shall be raising your concerns on pharmaceuticals and cosmetics, which a number of you mentioned, with my colleague Mr Liikanen and I will ask him to address those concerns.

With regard to the articles themselves, firstly, the scope: I accept Amendments Nos 7 and 8.

With regard to definitions: I can partly accept Amendments No 9 to Article 13 on the definition of TSE suspected animals.

But the inclusion of "fallen cattle, sheep and goats" in the definition cannot be accepted.

It is not practicable to collect, incinerate and carry out a full epidemiological investigation on each fallen animal.

The Commission will, however, be monitoring the situation closely both through the recently agreed measures on random testing for BSE and in the forthcoming proposal on animal waste.

However, I accept Amendment No 52.

I also accept Amendments Nos 10 and 49 to Article 3, with a slight reformulation to create the possibility of delegating the evaluation, not the approval, of tests to an external body.

With regard to classification, BSE status: I accept Amendments Nos 13, 14, 51 and 58.

With regard to epidemiological surveillance: I accept Amendment No 15 to Article 7, introducing the mandatory use of the rapid diagnostic tests in the annual monitoring programme.

Let me add, however, in passing, that we will keep under constant review the scope for increased testing of animals for BSE.

On specified risk material: unfortunately I cannot accept Amendments Nos 16, 17, 18, 40 and 41 to Article 8, bringing under codecision the approval and conditions for use of rapid diagnostic tests.

I happen to believe that it is essential to maintain the flexibility of the commitology procedure.

Nor can I accept that tests should be capable of detecting infectivity in all products and at all stages of the disease.

That is the advice I have been given.

I partly accept Amendment No 19 to Article 8, requesting a review of the age limits for SRM removal under a commitology procedure.

I cannot, however, accept the restraint of annual reviews and, in particular, the proposed deadline for the first review which is foreseen for 1 January next, which is too soon.

I also accept Amendment No 20 to Article 8, which brings under codecision the principle of granting derogations from the provisions on SRM removal in high-risk areas or for taking account of an effective feed ban.

I also welcome Amendments Nos 38, 39 and 56 to Annex IV.

They mainly propose no longer requiring the designation of long bones of cattle as SRM and suggest a reformulation of the proposed derogation for the removal of a vertebral column under a commitology procedure.

On feed ban, I accept Amendments Nos 22 and 42.

I can partly accept Amendments Nos 21 and 57 on condition that the possibility of extending the feed ban is allowed, irrespective of risk status.

I also partly accept Amendment No 54 to Annex V, laying down the detailed rules on the extended feed ban.

I cannot accept the derogation for dicalcium phosphate, as this is against our scientific advice.

I also cannot accept the limitation of extending the feed ban to any species, mainly pet animals, only if a risk of cross-contamination of livestock feed exists, as we believe that ruminant protein should be banned for all susceptible species.

I identify cats here in particular.

That is the advice I have been given in relation to cats.

I can partly accept Amendment No 50 to Annex V where it exempts gelatine from hides from the ban.

However, I cannot accept the exemption for feeding cats with ruminant protein from the ban.

I also cannot accept Amendment No 23 to Article 9, ensuring immediate application of the feed prohibitions, as this amendment does not fully make sense legally.

On disease eradication: I accept Amendments Nos 25 and 28.

I also welcome Amendment No 24 to Article 11, but propose to reformulate, providing for "regular" rather than "immediate" notification.

I can also partly accept Amendment No 26 to Article 13 and Amendment No 43 to Annex VII, introducing whole-herd slaughter for BSE in cattle, sheep and goats and, secondly, excluding research animals from these provisions.

Whole-herd slaughter for BSE only, not for scrapie, is acceptable to me on condition of approval of equivalent measures by commitology.

I cannot accept the second part of this amendment as it is in fact superfluous.

I can partly accept Amendment No 44 on condition that the equivalent measures are approved on a case-by-case basis under commitology.

I do not accept Amendment No 27 to Article 13, requiring a complete standstill on a holding with a confirmed TSE case, as I consider the extremely strict conditions of our proposals are already sufficient, as they require measures to be taken under strict, official veterinary supervision, duly certified.

I also cannot accept Amendment No 37 to Annex II, as the proposed definition is not used elsewhere in the text and is, in addition, inadequate for TSE control purposes.

I should add that ADNS regions are too small and too difficult to control.

Bigger regions which are legally defined may be possible, for instance the Azores, and I refer to what Mr Nicholson said earlier about Northern Ireland.

On the conditions for marketing animals: we welcome the intention of Amendment No 53 to Article 16.

However, I propose to reformulate the text to ensure approval of the equivalent schemes by commitology.

I also welcome the intention of Amendment No 45 to Annex VIII, but would ask for flexibility to determine the exact duration of the scrapie-free period.

I cannot accept Amendment No 55 to Annex VIII, reducing the protection measures against scrapie.

Furthermore, I cannot accept Amendment No 46 to Annex VIII, extending the ban on placing on the market offspring of TSE cases, for lack of scientific support.

Finally, on laboratory techniques, I accept Amendments Nos 47 and 48.

Thank you again for your cooperation.

I sincerely hope that this will continue to be a hugely important proposal and that we shall continue our cooperation on it.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.

The next item is the report (A5-0129/2000), on behalf of the European Parliament delegation to the Conciliation Committee, on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council directive amending Council directive 93/104/EC concerning certain aspects of the organisation of working time to cover sectors and activities excluded from that directive [C5-0183//2000 - 1998/0318(COD)].

As President for today' s sitting, it is my honour to inaugurate a new procedure.

Before giving the floor to our rapporteur, Mrs Smet, we are going to hear from Mr Provan in his capacity as chairman of the European Parliament delegation to the Conciliation Committee.

Mr President, as you say, this is a new procedure and I hope that it helps to establish in Parliament the importance of the conciliation procedure in achieving legislation to which Parliament has aspired.

I want to say today how much I enjoyed the support and the great help of the rapporteur and the Chairman of the Employment and Social Affairs Committee.

Mrs Smet, our rapporteur, was President of the Council of Ministers when the original Working Time Directive was enacted.

Mr Rocard is a former very well-known French minister and indeed Prime Minister.

We had an exceedingly strong team which Parliament was able to deploy in the negotiations with the Council and I am extremely grateful to both of them.

Parliament should be extremely grateful to both of them - especially the rapporteur for all the work that she put into this negotiation.

The delegation also had a great responsibility in this negotiation because we had many difficult decisions to take.

We did not achieve everything that we wanted to achieve as a Parliament, but I think we went a long way towards helping all those people who are now going to be included within the Working Time Directive to see some progress so that they can eventually get to the goal that we were all trying to achieve.

If we take, for instance, the junior doctors, we discover that Parliament originally wanted a six-year period in which to achieve the 48 hours.

That was never likely to be negotiated with the Council, but we were able to make substantial progress from the Council's original proposal of 13 years.

Indeed, we finished up with a nine-year period.

Only in extreme circumstances will governments be able to go through a procedure to justify an extension of that period of nine years.

The interesting thing in this aspect is that we are making real progress on reducing the time of work for junior doctors.

As many people will be aware, today, many junior doctors are working 72 hours in some countries.

The progress that we are making is that in the first three years, the junior doctors' hours will be reduced to 58 and over the following two years to 56 hours and 52 hours respectively.

We see that the junior doctors are, in fact, going to get a great benefit from this extension to the directive.

We also were able to clarify the position regarding the classification of mobile workers.

The case was argued that, for instance, somebody driving a lorry for a large retail store should be included in retail-type legislation for working time, and only genuine transport workers are now going to fall exclusively within the transport sector.

That, I think, was another major achievement for Parliament in this negotiation.

We move on to the fishermen who were greatly concerned by the application of this directive to their working life because they felt they would not be able to operate properly within that system.

In all honour to everybody concerned in the negotiation, the Council and all Members of the delegation, they have made real progress and I recommend the outcome of the conciliation process to the House and hope they support it.

I think we can in fact thank all the Members of Parliament that were involved in this conciliation procedure.

Mr President, I would first of all like to thank the President, Mr Provan, for his kind words, but particularly for the way in which he, together with Mr Rocard, has presided over and guided the entire process.

I would also like to thank all the delegates, as it would indeed be impossible to find a compromise on a number of difficult and sensitive issues, if it was not for the fact that everyone moderated their demands, and this is what eventually happened. My thanks go to all of you.

The vote in the European Parliament tomorrow and in the Council the day after will provisionally end a decade of European legislation concerning certain aspects of the organisation of working time.

I am adding "provisionally" , because although a number of sectors and activities are already covered by conclusive horizontal legislation, the vertical rules are still pending.

The best way to establish these vertical rules is via collective labour agreements, but if these collective labour agreements are not forthcoming, then the Commission will need to take the initiative and propose draft directives.

This has already happened in the case of road transport. The European Parliament has made its position clear but it appears that the Council is unable to adopt the common position.

This is intolerable, really intolerable, because road transport is one of the key sectors, there are many difficulties within that sector and because so many accidents happen within the Member States due to a lack of legislation and control.

I would call on the Council and both sides of industry finally to resolve this matter.

Since no draft directive has been proposed for inland shipping yet, I would ask the Commission to work on that.

Fortunately, agreements have now been concluded within aviation, navigation at sea and also rail transport, which have been translated into directives. Like rail transport, the sea-fishing and off-shore sectors, as well as the activities of junior doctors, fall within the scope of the directive which we are discussing today.

For the sea-fishing sector, the European Parliament managed to secure a maximum working week of 48 hours, over a twelve-month reference period. Exemptions are only possible under a collective labour agreement or following consultation involving both sides of industry.

It is indeed necessary to provide for these exemptions, because not only do sea fishermen stay at sea for extended periods of time, in certain countries even 3 000 hours on average annually, they also carry out heavy work at what is by far the most mobile of workplaces.

Regarding junior doctors, I would refer to what Mr Provan said, because he explained quite clearly what we eventually achieved.

The main thing is that those countries that want a transitional period in excess of nine years will need to follow a very demanding procedure in order to achieve this.

The reason why they want to have an extended transitional period and the decision which is eventually taken have to be published in the EU' s Official Journal.

I hope that this procedure will create a disincentive for those countries because we do not intend to carry on applying the number of working hours prescribed for longer than nine years.

In 1993, when I, in the capacity of President of the Council, signed the directive concerning certain aspects of the organisation of working time, I was aware that the Commission' s proposal of 1990 did not exclude any sectors or activities. But at the time, it appeared impossible for the Council to draw up a directive which covered all employees in all sectors and activities.

Hence the Commission proposed to take a separate and additional initiative for the benefit of those sectors and activities which were excluded from the Council' s directive.

That culminated in the 1997 White Paper and the 1998 consultation paper and communication.

The present directive is the first to be born out of negotiations in a Conciliation Committee within the framework of the European social policy, with the European Parliament acting as co-legislator.

The power of codecision proved to be decisive.

I think we owe our success, the fact that we eventually reached a sound compromise, to Parliament, among other things, which in its wisdom, only tabled a few amendments. Indeed, had we found ourselves in a conciliation procedure faced with 30 or 40 amendments tabled by Parliament, it would have been extremely difficult ever to reach a compromise.

In this case, we managed to keep the procedure within bounds. As such, the European Parliament gave evidence of a legislative maturity, which the Council and the Intergovernmental Conference, in particular, would do well not to lose sight of.

Mr President, as British Conservatives, we have always opposed the Working Time Directive.

The idea that politicians in Brussels or Strasbourg should determine how many hours different people work across Europe is, we believe, fundamentally daft.

To extend it to groups such as offshore oil workers and sea fishermen is particularly so.

However, because of the special issue of over-worked junior doctors in the UK, as Conservative MEPs we voted last November to extend the directive to them.

We very much hoped that this would pressure national governments - especially our own - to produce a better deal.

Certainly Parliament as a whole was of similar mind, hence the Conciliation Committee on which I was privileged to serve.

I extend congratulations to you, Mr President, in your former capacity as president of that conciliation group - plus Mrs Smet and Mr Rocard.

I believe in the circumstances we could not have done any better, but those three played a major role in that.

I should briefly like to mention a point made by some of my colleagues from that delegation.

I hope other nationals will forgive me if I mention only other British colleagues, for a reason that will become apparent.

The first speaker in the main meeting was Mr Hughes.

I am not known for agreeing with him regularly but I congratulate him on the intensity of what he said which set the meeting off to a very good start.

He was followed by Mrs Lynne - also due to speak today - who reinforced what was said with great vigour.

I mention that because, when it came to my turn to speak, it enabled me, as a British delegate from a third party, to speak in support, despite the fact that all three parties have many different policies on different issues.

The fact that I could say that on this issue we were speaking as one and it was a cross-party alliance hopefully helped to reinforce the overall message and the will of Parliament.

One of my colleagues afterwards said that point was a powerful intervention.

Certainly it was meant to be.

Imagine my disappointment after the meeting when an official came up to me and said that while I was making those points on behalf of Parliament another Member also from the UK was busy shaking his head negatively the whole time that I was speaking.

That will not have strengthened our case.

It may or may not have made any difference but certainly it will not have done the Parliamentary delegation any good service.

A few weeks later, we did the best that we could.

It will be presented - as you, President, have already presented it - as "nine years".

But it is, as you know, nine years, plus two years, plus one year.

The UK Government will add that up to twelve years as against the 13 years which the UK Government was asking for initially.

Having only got what we consider minor concessions, we can confirm that, as British Conservatives, we neither support the Working Time Directive nor its extension to any other grouping.

We still support a better deal for junior doctors; we will still continue to pressure our own government to provide it, but a directive from the European Parliament is clearly not the right way to secure it.

I would like to begin by echoing previous speakers and adding my words of thanks to the rapporteur and to our chairman and to you for the magnificent work you did in that conciliation.

The progress we achieved is in large part thanks to the formidable effort and attention to detail the rapporteur put in to this.

There are three main issues which I would like to concentrate on in the brief time available to me.

In the original working time directive we had agreed way back in 1993 that it would be possible to introduce annualisation of working time for categories of workers, but only where collective agreements allowed that to happen.

The first two points I would like to make relate to categories of workers where we have managed to achieve that progress in the conciliation.

As far as offshore workers and mobile workers in the transport sector are concerned - there was an attempt in the common position to allow annualisation of working time for those workers without collective agreement.

Thanks to conciliation, collective agreement will now need to be the route for an extension to annualisation.

That was an important point of progress.

There we have now built in to the directive the principle that a 48-hour average working week over a period of one year will be the rule.

That can be subject to derogation but again only after attempts to broker collective agreements to involve the social partners.

That should be the rule wherever there is an attempt to introduce annualisation and that principle has been safeguarded as a result of the conciliation.

The third area I want to concentrate on - and it is what other speakers have mentioned - relates to junior doctors.

Looking at this part of the agreement without detailed knowledge of the negotiations that went into it, it must seem like a very strange animal.

A four-year transposition period - five years transition and then the possibility of extra time beyond that.

But of course that was to take account of the special difficulties facing one or two Member States.

I would repeat what other speakers have said: for us the period in question is nine years.

That will be the normal period within which Member States will be expected to comply with the requirements of this directive in relation to junior doctors.

That is why the procedure to go beyond that into what we might term extra time is so open - in a way humiliating for any government that attempts to take that step.

I think that in fact we will see all Member States complying with that section of the directive relating to junior doctors within that nine-year time frame.

I am confident, speaking today, that will be the case.

A further important point might have been missed.

The provisions relating to nine years for junior doctors only relate to the average working week.

The other provisions of the directive relating to daily and weekly rest breaks, annual leave and nightwork will, of course, apply to junior doctors after a three-year transposition period just as they do for all other workers.

Those parts of the directive can, of course, be subject to derogation but only by collective agreement so those elements will apply to junior doctors.

The sections dealing with annual leave cannot be negotiated away and it is important to bear that in mind: i.e. the nine years for junior doctors applies only to working time - average weekly working time - and the other provisions of the directive apply after three years.

The final point I would like to make relates to the transport dossier.

It is very important that we get movement in that area in the Transport Council.

Maybe the Commissioner has some news for us today.

There was an agreement in the rail sector that the provisions of the working time directive would apply in that sector so long as there was parallel progress in other transport sectors, particularly the road sector.

Unless we get progress in that sector, I am quite certain we are going to see a problem for the rail sector.

The agreement will not be implemented in the near future at national level.

Mr President, I would also like to add my thanks to Mrs Smet in particular for doing an excellent job of work on the working time directive and also, of course, to Mr Rocard and to you, yourself.

I would agree with Philip Bushill-Matthews as well.

I think the strength of having all-party support throughout the UK on our delegation was very, very useful.

I would like to talk specifically about junior doctors.

I am very pleased that they are going to be brought in line with the working time directive.

There are 270 000 junior doctors across the EU who will be affected by this.

50.1% in my constituency work over 72 hours a week as do 10 000 in the UK as a whole.

You can see from those figures that it is extremely important that all Member States actually meet those objectives and I mean the nine-year objective.

The present situation is not good for patients or doctors alike - they have our life in their hands.

We would not want to be treated by a drunken doctor and I do not believe that we should be treated by an over-tired doctor.

Evidence proves that somebody who is impaired by tiredness is impaired in the same way as drunkenness.

The British Medical Association was saying that 15% of junior doctors were leaving the profession citing stress, overwork and length of hours.

A lot of those were going to Australia and New Zealand where the working practices were better.

We have to stop that drain.

The nine-year timetable, of course, is an improvement on what the Council of Ministers wanted.

It is made up of four years' implementation and five years to bring down the working time from 58 to 48 hours.

It is far better than what the Council wanted which was the 13-year period.

I, of course, would have preferred a shorter time.

As I have said before, our life is in their hands and it is important that we get this right.

The UK Government, of course, was part of the problem.

They maintain that they cannot achieve the reduction in this timescale.

I believe that they are wrong and that is why we have the extension for two years and also the extension after that for one year.

But as everyone else has said, it has to be in exceptional circumstances.

There must be rigorous notification and justification procedures and I hope that the British Government, and other Member State governments who feel that they can delay further by seeking two years and then another will feel so embarrassed that they will not seek to do so and meet the goal in nine years.

It is not twelve years - it is nine years and we must state that very, very clearly.

It is long enough - I would have liked it to have been shorter, but let us hope the governments, and the British Government in particular, adhere to that.

Mr President, I must apologise for this appearing to be a British show at this moment.

I assure you that it does change with the next speaker.

I also would like to thank Mrs Smet, our rapporteur, for the excellent work that she has done throughout this entire process.

With the support that she has received from Mr Rocard and from yourself, she has managed to make progress in face of the tensions between the high expectations of those whose lives will be affected by these decisions, some six million workers, and the difficulties and some intransigence presented by certain Member States.

I speak as my group's representative on that parliamentary delegation and I know what I have seen.

This is a health and safety issue, as has been said, for both the workers concerned and for the public.

While I recognise, like others, that junior doctors are not the only group affected, this issue has proved the most difficult.

I have been deeply concerned at some of the arguments put forward by certain governments which have said that other aspects of health provision could be threatened if the reduction of working time for this group was brought in more quickly.

I cannot understand why it is less important for these workers to have reasonable working conditions and hours than any other group of health workers.

I want to know whether junior doctors in some countries are some sort of superhuman who can do without adequate rest and who will not harm their own health or that of their patients in the process.

The mother of one such trainee doctor said to me recently that she had been writing to the British Prime Minister and his wife, Tony and Cherie, to ask if they would be happy if their new baby were to be delivered by a tired, stressed-out doctor in a semi-drunken condition as that described by Mrs Lynne.

I consider that would be a real health and safety issue requiring rapid action.

As we have all said, we must be clear that nine years has to be seen as an absolute limit, that anything more is an aberration.

Any country not managing that should not be surprised if they find their staff moving elsewhere, to countries which have managed to implement more modern working conditions.

The stepped approach which has been brought in must not be used to simply give a redefinition of working time such as removing meal breaks or time spent on call but not actually treating patients.

That would simply be following the bad practices recently tried out by certain burger chains.

However, at least some of those chains pay their part-time 17-year-old staff more per hour than some junior doctors get in overtime payment.

I would like to congratulate in advance those Member States that will meet their obligations under this directive for all sectors.

The progress of others will be monitored very carefully.

I acknowledge the Commission's role in this and hope that the Commissioner at that time will show the same commitment as that shown by Mrs Diamantopoulou.

Regretfully I am not sure that my group will be able to fully support the proposals overall despite the improvements that Mrs Smet and the Parliament team have been able to obtain in this very difficult situation.

Mr President, I too want to thank and congratulate Mrs Smet on an excellent piece of work in the Conciliation Committee and also on her report.

I also want to thank other key people such as Mr Provan and Mr Rocard.

They have played an important role.

The Parliamentary delegation was basically very much in agreement, even though we differed in our willingness to compromise when it came to the crunch.

It was, of course, important to solve problems.

The idea was that seven million people should be brought within the scope of the directive.

When I learned that the whole thing was to go off without a hitch, that is to say that there was to be an agreement, I nonetheless took the liberty of voting against.

I wanted to make the point that, in spite of everything, I was not satisfied with everything in this compromise.

I was especially critical of the agreement when it came to the issue of young doctors.

If the decision is interpreted as it already has been by some people in this debate, namely as saying that the transposition and transitional periods for doctors should add up to nine years and that there should, above and beyond that, be the possibility of an additional three years' extra time, then we arrive at a total period of twelve years.

This is really little different from the Council' s position, involving thirteen years.

There was, therefore, not so much of a compromise on that particular point.

I think this is a serious matter, because it is about patients having to suffer and about doctors being placed in impossible situations, from both moral and personal points of view.

Young doctors do not choose these working conditions and working hours but are forced to accept them.

I thought it was appropriate for at least someone in this Parliament to use his voting right for the purpose of indicating this dissatisfaction.

I now hope to see the three extra years become a facility which cannot be counted upon but which is only granted in really exceptional cases.

The intention expressed by this Chamber has, of course, been that, where junior doctors are concerned, the period for implementing the present directive should be nine years and that the three extra years should only apply in extreme and exceptional cases.

Naturally, we hope that, in reality, the process will be still more rapid.

We also want, in the future, to see the working time directive apply to those groups which have still not been brought within its scope.

In common with Mr Hughes, I should like to ask the Commission a question regarding these groups.

How far has the work progressed when it comes to the transport sector and lorry drivers?

I want to conclude by saying that, on more than one occasion, the European Parliament has shown itself to be a significant force where working time legislation in Europe is concerned.

I hope that this will continue.

It is not just a question of establishing longest permitted working times but of a good deal else besides.

There are ever more differences in the way in which working time is distributed in our society.

For young families, the difficulty of reconciling full-time work with family and children is becoming ever greater.

Working time puts the squeeze on women and children, in particular.

It is also an issue relating to age and to where one is in one' s life.

Young and old have different needs and different abilities.

We need a whole series of changes to working time policy, and it is my hope that it will be possible for the European Parliament to come back with more initiatives in this area.

Mr President, I join in the congratulations to all involved with this matter.

Rather than reiterate what other colleagues have said, I think the core issue is the junior doctors in training.

Obviously, whilst nine years is not the perfect solution which Parliament originally sought, it is the best possible compromise.

It is incumbent on us to send out a clear message that we would expect every government in the European Union to comply fully with the nine years.

Even though I know there are rigorous tests and standards as to whether or not an extension would be granted, it should only be granted in the most exceptional circumstances and not for any willy-nilly ideology.

In addition, as Mr Hughes pointed out, the other parts of the entitlements come into force immediately.

Even though the overall reduction in working hours may be postponed for some time, the actual rest-period times and so on come into force immediately.

I shall just deal very briefly with two other points concerning the whole working time directive.

Firstly, concerning fishermen, there is some attempt to compromise within the proposals before us.

However, it is a notoriously difficult area to enforce because of outside conditions, such as bad weather, that will affect the way fishermen operate.

Perhaps we should review this at some stage in the near future and look at it anew to try to come up with a better solution.

Secondly, transport workers: when we already have tachograph legislation in place, why do we need to bring in a separate and new directive on transport workers, in particular lorry drivers and so on?

Perhaps now is the time to look at this afresh.

New technology - in particular digital tachographs and individual smart cards for individual drivers on the tachograph - could be the best way to regulate the hours during which drivers are on the road and at work.

It will also ensure that they can have equal benefits with every other worker in the Union.

Finally, I wish to pay my compliments once again to Mrs Smet.

I have one small, further request to the Commissioner.

Perhaps now is the time, after we have agreed this conciliation and brought this new piece of legislation into being, to carry out an impact assessment on how the existing legislation is working, whether it is of benefit to the workers - increasing their health and safety - and whether it is increasing employment, which is one of the original arguments behind it.

Mr President, I too would like to convey my heartfelt thanks to everyone who took part in the negotiations on our side, especially the rapporteur but also you yourself and Mr Rocard, as well as other members of the negotiation delegation.

I would like also to extend warm thanks to the Commission, particularly for their declaration on working on Sundays.

This was a major obstacle for us, mainly because the Commission had skirted this thorny issue a little too easily in the past.

The declaration was therefore a great help to us.

I would like to say one thing to the representatives of the GUE/NGL Group and the Greens.

If you vote against this compromise - and I would understand if you did, because I myself find nine years for junior doctors far too long - you will then be against everything, in effect.

If this line were to be taken across the board, and if Parliament were to say "no" , then we would not have a solution in nine years, or ninety years.

If it were up to the British Government - we heard this quite clearly in the negotiations - it could well be 50 years and maybe longer before they resolve this issue.

The first problem was that they appeared unable to train a sufficient number of doctors. If, therefore, you do not train sufficient doctors, you need to obtain them from other countries.

If this plan fails too, then the whole procedure could take a very long time. If this is not something you want, then you need to approve this directive now, obviously with the reservation that it is an empty exercise - I am still convinced of this - and junior doctors should not need to be in this exemption position at all.

I have one question for the Commission. It concerns the other matters at issue, specifically that of transport.

I would like to know how the Commission intends to deal with this. It is now up to the Commission.

The working time directive will not be complete until these issues have been resolved.

The ball is now quite clearly in the Commission' s court.

The Transport Council is behaving badly. Transport conjures up images of action and movement, but the Transport Council must be the most inactive of all councils and does absolutely nothing.

I wonder if the Commission can think of a way to resolve this.

Failing this, Mr President, we should seriously consider taking legal action against the Transport Council, as was done very successfully a couple of years ago before the Court.

Finally, Mr President, one of the first people to propose working time legislation was Winston Churchill.

That was a key moment in history, not only in the history of Great Britain, but also in the history of Europe as a whole, because in the Netherlands too, we adopted this legislation without questioning it.

That makes it all the easier to bring this directive about. We thus have the feeling that we are in a way completing Winston Churchill' s work with this directive, especially if we bear in mind that he did at least manage to bring a terrible war to a successful end in five years, while the present British Government would not even be capable of resolving the problem of junior doctors in 50 years.

He - more than anyone - should be in our thoughts when dealing with this subject matter.

Mr President, for me it has been a real privilege - and a surprise - to attend this conciliation procedure and to witness first hand the resistance and difficulties we have had to face in order to make progress.

This is demonstrated by the excellent work of Mrs Smet, and also Mr Provan and Mr Rocard.

I would also like to thank the Commissioner, Mrs Diamantopoulou, her department and so many people - also the Portuguese Presidency - who have allowed Parliament, like Churchill, to set a milestone in the construction of a social and more humanitarian Europe.

I am convinced that there is another reason for recommending that Parliament vote in favour of this report: the difficulties we have faced in making progress with regard to certain governments.

I will be truly happy to see these sectors, which were excluded from the 1993 directive, provided with a recognised European regulation on working time, even if it does involve long and protracted timescales.

However, we should not be dazzled by the light.

There is no doubt that public opinion - and I too am concerned about this public opinion - does not understand why these procedures are so slow and why, with regard to the problem of young doctors or fishermen, we have not been able to make any progress.

It is not acceptable - since we all agree that we cannot continue to ask these young doctors to work these exhausting hours and that we cannot continue to put our patients at risk - that we have not been able to make speedier progress.

I hope that, in fact, the timescale will be nine years and not thirteen years, although it pains me to say that, as a Spaniard, I feel restricted by the fact that it has been my government which has insisted most on having this additional period.

They may have requested this additional period, but we should take great care to ensure that they do not use it.

Lastly, I would like to ask the Commissioner and the Commission, to monitor closely the application of the directive, so that in nine years time they do not ask for three more.

Mr President, in previous debates here last November and in April of this year I supported the general principles behind the idea of directives on working time and I still do so.

Clearly there are significant health and safety issues which can be addressed - not only for the protection of workers but also for the protection of their customers and the general public - and issues of customer health and safety of course are particularly relevant in relation to doctors in training.

Like my colleague, Mrs Lambert, I am concerned that this compromise has not gone quite far enough in relation to doctors' hours.

There would remain though some workers in some working places where practical issues do not readily lend themselves to the implementation of this type of directive.

Coming from Scotland, with one of the largest EU fishing fleets, I would like once again to focus on the problem of fisheries and the defining of working time.

I note the compromise concerning sea-fishermen - a maximum of 48 hours of weekly work in a reference period of 12 months and the possibility of derogation after consultation and by agreement.

This may be an improvement but I still have some questions to put to the Commission.

We have to recognise that there were good reasons for the initial exclusion of the fisheries sector.

As regards fishing there is a deep-seated suspicion of Brussels in many respects and a lot of opposition to the whole idea of fishermen being told when to sleep or when to go to sea, given that their working time is governed by uncontrollable factors such as climatic conditions and the movement of shoals of fish.

The directive says that work at sea comprises sea fishing and other offshore work.

Many fishermen, particularly in Scotland, are organised on a family basis - they are share-fishermen paid only a proportion of their vessel's catch.

They are clearly not employees in the sense of the word that we would understand.

Is this directive going to affect them or is it not?

I have asked the Commission this question previously in committee and in plenary and have not yet received absolute clarification of this point.

The Conciliation Committee concluded in the case of those share fishermen who are employees - a statement which seems to me to be contradictory - that it is for Member States to determine the conditions for entitlement to annual leave and payments etc, but there is no explanation as to whether or when a share fisherman is employed.

I know for sure that the fishermen that I see around the coast of Scotland can only be defined as self-employed and I stress the need for clarification of this.

There are huge differences between a large-scale long-distance fleet where fishermen are employed by companies and sent off for months on end and the smaller- and medium-sized boats, which operate on a family or a cooperative basis.

This is an issue about the definition of self-employment or owner operation and I know that the compromise deletes own-account transport operators, clearly and quite properly identifying an exception in that area.

I call for a similar exception for share-fishermen.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, it is crucial that all employees are assured a decent working environment in order to guarantee that their health and safety is protected, which requires an organisation of working time that allows daily and weekly rest breaks, annual leave, holidays and other aspects. This is why an appropriate solution must be found to the problem of all workers in activities that were excluded from the scope of Directive 93, specifically in the area of transport, fishing and the activities of junior doctors.

The truth is that, despite a positive proposal by Parliament, which sought to respond to these issues, the Council has insisted on an unacceptable position. This substantially reduces the initial proposals of the European Parliament, specifically the increase of the period for transposing the directive to all sectors from two to three years.

The only exception made concerns junior doctors, for whom the period is extended from four to nine and possibly to twelve years. Apart from anything else, this also threatens the safety of the patients themselves who are examined by doctors who work excessively long hours.

That is why we have voted against this agreement, since what we want, of course, is a better agreement.

It was never going to be easy to satisfy all of the interested parties who have lobbied and worked closely with the Union institutions to bring about amendments to the 1993 directive.

This is the new directive, of course, and I am pleased that it has been extended to offshore workers, fishermen and doctors in training.

The most contentious part of the directive was bound to relate to doctors in training who would benefit from this piece of legislation.

One should recall that the Council had originally proposed an exemption for a period of some 13 years before doctors in training would secure the benefits of the directive.

Naturally, Parliament put forward its own proposals to support the right of doctors in training to be covered by this directive after a period of 4 years.

Hence the conciliation procedure which you, Mr President, were involved in.

But whatever honeyed words are attached to the conclusions of the procedure, the bottom line is that junior doctors will not secure benefits for a period of nine years at least.

According to the conclusions of the Conciliation Committee, junior doctors will secure benefits after a transitional period of five years and a four-year transposition period.

I fully support the right of junior doctors and doctors in training to secure the benefits of this directive, but the Conciliation Committee conclusions will have reluctantly to be accepted.

I would like in conclusion to refer to one small but very important matter, namely that under exceptional circumstances there may be a further extension of two years and indeed up to three years if governments argue that the reduction would cause real administrative difficulties.

I do hope that this directive can be implemented sooner rather than later.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, working time policy - as we can see once again - is not economic policy, it is health and safety at work policy.

When used preventively, it saves the state and the economy a great deal of money.

I have completely failed to understand in this debate why a reasonable set of rules was not adopted back in 1993, especially as the Commission and Parliament did not want any derogations even then.

Seven million workers were affected and specific sectors, such as the mobile worker sector, have been subject to ruinous competition over recent years, especially in Germany.

It is therefore also a social problem and it is not enough, Mr Crowley, to use tachographs or other technical aids.

One does not exclude the other.

We also need a framework directive, because the employees who are affected have been working in a grey zone for a long time now.

They had no rules, they were not covered by a collective agreement, they were exploited and some also engaged in self-exploitation.

We know that this overload sometimes gave rise to alcohol-related problems.

Parliament has shown sufficient flexibility; Mrs Smet highlighted our legislative maturity.

I think, Mrs Smet, you have proven that we can also fight.

I am trying to muster support, even if we have not achieved everything we wanted to.

But the transition period and the graduated plan are the maximum we have allowed the Council.

I hope that no government will use up the full period of time and am counting on constructive competition between the Member States to see which State will be the first to implement the proposals from Parliament and the Commission.

Directive 93/104 was already very restrictive as far as worker production is concerned.

It does not harmonise social legislation upwards, quite the opposite. It establishes a European framework which falls a long way short of workers' expectations: an 11-hour daily rest period, a 48-hour working week, a 24-hour weekly break.

What is more, a number of categories were excluded from its field of competence.

We find the compromise, which Parliament is to vote on today following the meetings of the Conciliation Committee, unsatisfactory in terms of both the health and the safety of workers.

It makes flexibility more widespread, particularly for sea fishermen, establishing the systematic annualisation of reference periods.

It will permit further exemptions to the already excessive legislation of 48 hours per week.

Finally, it will take nine years, in the best possible case, for the working week of doctors in training to be reduced from 58 hours to 48.

In fact, the proposed working time organisation institutes social deregulation at the very time when, in France, doctors in training are campaigning for decent working conditions and genuine safety for service-users.

Proper organisation of working time would entail, we reiterate, a real reduction in working hours accompanied by moves to create a sufficient number of jobs.

We cannot support this report as it stands.

Mr President, this proposal will bring an additional seven million workers in Europe under the protection of the Working Time Directive, allowing them to have reasonable working conditions and proper rest periods.

However, to get a 48-hour week, junior doctors must wait nine years minimum and possibly twelve years.

I will not pretend to be happy with this situation.

It is, however, the best that we could achieve if we were to end once and for all the Council's delaying tactics.

It has been obvious since 1993 that those excluded from the directive at that time would eventually come under its protection.

One has to ask, therefore, why over that seven-year period virtually nothing was done in Ireland or in Britain to bring the number of doctors forward that would be needed to implement it.

In Ireland some junior doctors work over 100 hours per week, the average being 70 to 80.

Only last night they suspended strike action which they had threatened because they have now reached an interim agreement which will ensure that they are actually paid for the overtime they work.

In some cases they were not paid at all, in some cases only half the normal rate.

Some progress has been made and no doubt the conclusion of the conciliation has helped them in that regard.

Through the Council of Ministers both Britain and Ireland fought tooth-and-nail to slow the process down.

The working arrangements for junior doctors are like a horror story from a Dickensian novel of the nineteenth century.

I find it bizarre that at the beginning of the 21st century we are still arguing for common sense with regard to health and safety.

I would appeal to all national governments, including Ireland, not to utilise the additional provisions for extending the implementation of this directive beyond the nine-year period and would remind them that it is intended only as an exceptional measure if all other genuine steps have been taken to implement the measures here.

Mr President, the proposed working time directive for specific categories of worker such as doctors in training, offshore workers or mobile workers, is typical of the slow and derisory nature of social Europe.

The recitals of the proposal, nonetheless, stress the specific importance of this file, the first major file on social issues, adding, even, that it is a matter of the health and safety of 7 million workers.

In France, for example, a number of strikes by junior doctors recently drew the attention of public opinion to the intolerable length of the working day for this category of worker, harmful to the doctors in training themselves, but also to the quality of the care they are providing their patients with.

The same question arises, with at least as much urgency, for other categories such as offshore workers or transport workers.

What we should have had was a quick decision and an appropriate reduction in working hours.

Well, the proposal does intend to cut hours, but by phasing in the cuts.

For the first three years, 58-hour working weeks are permitted.

We have to wait 5 years for the maximum working week to be reduced to 48 hours, and the Commission is cynical enough to cite technical reasons in order to grant a further 2-year delay in application.

Who are they trying to kid that these measures could not come into force almost immediately if there was any political will to act in favour of the interests of the workers concerned rather than favouring the claims of management?

Some restriction, even a derisory cut, in working hours is better than no restriction at all.

We shall not vote against this text, but we shall conclude from this experience that workers can have no expectations of social Europe and that, decidedly, nothing can replace the collective strength of the workers when it comes to amending legislation in favour of the workers.

Mr President, the chairman of the European Parliament' s Committee on Employment and Social Affairs could not remain silent in this debate.

Thank heavens, my fellow Members have already said what needed to be said about the issue itself.

I shall come back to this point.

We are not terribly proud of the final result, but I should at least like to pay tribute to it, as some outcome had to be found.

At this point, I should like to thank Mrs Smet, our efficient and indefatigable rapporteur, and Mr Provan, who was also the persistent and efficient chairman of our Conciliation Committees.

I should like to thank all our coordinators, Mr Brok, Mr Hughes, Mrs Flautre, Mr Schmid, Mrs Lynne, who demonstrated great understanding in order to reach some sort of outcome.

I should like to pay tribute to the Commission.

Without wishing to embarrass you, Mrs Diamantopoulou, throughout almost all this debate Parliament has had the technical and even political support of the Commission, particularly on the important amendments.

I have one small correction to make, unless I misunderstood, to what Mrs Smet has just said. It is not exactly the first successful conciliation on social matters between the European Parliament and the Council.

It is the second, following the successful conciliation on the minor issue of workers working in an explosive atmosphere.

This is, however, an infinitely more wide-ranging issue, of course.

Mr President, I must point out how unusually tough the Council is to deal with.

The political truth is that the Parliament team, in an astounding spirit of responsibility and unanimity - and you have witnessed the benign respect which I and Mr Bushill-Matthews, for example, have for each other - was remarkable for its united front as much as for its determination to succeed.

Parliament made most of the running.

We are not proud of the result in terms of the content.

In a real democracy Parliament would have been determining the legislation.

I would like to remind the Council that we are just as dedicated to achieving results, but that they must not expect Parliament to make quite so many concessions on a regular basis.

Mr President, I would like first of all to make three political comments.

I feel that the successful outcome of the conciliation procedure proves that where there is a will, there is a way.

In order for this conciliation to succeed, we had to take account of the fifteen different systems in the Member States, different fields of work and proposals from various employer and employee federations.

We also had to take account of the viability of health services as things now stand and competitiveness in sectors such as transport and fisheries.

It has taken six years to achieve today' s result and it is the first major conciliation decision in the social sphere - and I say major because it affects some 5 million workers.

I feel that the most interesting point - and this is my third comment - is the number of workers affected by this directive, who are at present excluded from the working time directive and who will enjoy these rights once this directive is applied.

In my view, therefore, we should be satisfied regardless of whether or not this directive meets all our requirements.

The upshot is that the provisions of the working directive will apply to doctors in training, workers at sea, rail workers and all non-mobile workers in excluded sectors.

I would like in particular to thank the Chairman of the Committee, Mr Rocard, the Vice-Chairman, Mr Provan, who used his great experience to guide the conciliation procedure, and of course, Mrs Smet who, with her wealth of ministerial experience, helped achieve such a difficult conciliation.

I would also like to give special thanks to the Portuguese Presidency and the Member States, particularly those which, for reasons we cannot go into right now, have experienced major problems with their national health services, such as Great Britain, Spain and Ireland.

Certain speakers raised the issue of the implementation of the directive.

I should like to stress that it is indeed a particularly important issue.

One of the Commission' s fundamental duties is to monitor the implementation of directives.

Here I should like to ask the MEPs to cooperate with us and closely monitor any underhanded plans in Member States, so that the Commission can intervene immediately.

A further two questions have also been raised, the first by Messrs Hughes, Schmid and Pronk as to what we intend to do in the road and rail transport sectors.

First, I must tell you that the Transport Council is involved, making the whole process even more complicated.

Secondly, as for road transport, the Commission tabled a proposal in 1996, but it was blocked by the Council in 1998.

The Commission intends, with the cooperation of the French Presidency, to re-table the issue.

We are awaiting new negotiations by the social partners and we hope to obtain their assent.

If we cannot proceed in this way, we shall have to change the whole approach we have adopted so far.

With regard to the issue of fisheries, the matter was raised once again by Mr Hudghton.

We have discussed this in the past.

I will try to clarify it.

I am afraid I was not clear enough.

So I would like to repeat that the issue of self-employment in fisheries is not included in this directive. The self-employed in fisheries is a matter of national competence.

That is very clear and very precise.

I thank you very much for all your support and help during these discussions, and that of your services.

It is very much appreciated indeed.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.

The next item is the Commission communication - Reviewing aid to third countries.

Mr President, I hope Parliament will excuse me if shortly after making a brief presentation I have to leave, but this is, as Parliament knows, very much the collective work of the RELEX Commissioners as a whole and very much the shared work of my colleague, Commissioner Nielson and myself.

Commissioner Nielson will still be here to make his own contribution to this report and to answer any questions which may arise.

The function I have to attend is a joint meeting of two committees which was specially arranged to discuss a number of external assistance issues so I hope Parliament will be understanding.

I think it is fair to say that the proposals that we have put forward go right to the heart of the issues that are raised in the White Paper on reform and it is extremely important for us to demonstrate that the reform of our external assistance programmes is the flagship or one of the flagships, for an overall reform process.

People occasionally get a little bored when one talks about internal procedures but what they should recognise is what we are discussing in these particular proposals: ways in which, first of all, we can get assistance to people more rapidly and effectively and, secondly, ways in which we can change the image of the European Union around the world.

All of us have, alas, experienced too frequently occasions when instead of us getting the credit for what we are trying to do on behalf of Europe's taxpayers, we get blamed for not doing it a lot more effectively and a lot more rapidly.

I hope that is a problem which we will be able to tackle.

Very briefly, it is worth reminding ourselves what the background to this issue is.

We have seen a threefold increase in external assistance commitments managed by the SCR over the last 10 years.

That has been driven by events and by political pressures; a recognition of the responsibilities we should discharge in Central and Eastern Europe - the recognition which that triggered of our responsibilities in the Mediterranean.

It is worth noting that our assistance programmes in the Mediterranean have increased four and a half times since 1990.

Then there is the Balkans crisis where the attempts to put in place a common foreign and security policy are being particularly tested.

While our external assistance programmes themselves have grown very rapidly, staff resources have failed to keep pace.

The Commission has 2.9 staff for every EUR 10 million that we manage.

That compares with an average figure about twice that for Member States - the figure is 5.7 but it goes as high as 9 for some Member States and 4.2 for the World Bank.

One of the consequences of that has been the increasing use of technical assistance offices which has been much criticised by Parliament and by the Court of Auditors on the grounds of weak monitoring and a lack of political control.

It is worth noting that we have spent about EUR 170 million a year on the 80 technical assistance offices which is equivalent to the cost of 800 staff working for the Commission.

A consequence of all this is that the SCR today has over EUR 21 billion in outstanding commitments awaiting payments.

That is an embarrassingly large figure.

I do not blame the staff of the SCR who work extremely hard in very difficult circumstances, but there are not enough of them.

They have had to operate with extremely difficult procedures.

They have also had to operate against a background of Member States second, third and fourth guessing every implementation decision that we try to make.

We have brought forward in the document, which has now been made public, our proposals for dealing with this problem.

As honourable Members will know, over the years Parliament has put forward a number of proposals including the idea that we should externalise the management of our overseas aid.

That remains a possibility for the long term though it would take some time because one would first have to get in place the necessary legal framework.

However my principal concern at the moment is not how we get from A to Z - that often seems rather easier than getting from A to B. What we have to do - whatever the long term objective may be is - to find better ways of managing our external assistance straightaway.

We have put forward a number of proposals.

We have put forward proposals for improving programming: making sure that all the RELEX Commissioners share responsibility for programming - we have suggested the reuniting of the project cycle from identification to implementation - we think the present split has not worked well.

What we propose to do is to create a new implementation body replacing the SCR which we think should be called Europe Aid.

It would be initially an office under a board made up of all the External Relations Commissioners though, as I say, the option of moving to externalisation in the longer term remains on the table.

We want to devolve more responsibility to delegations and, where possible, to national authorities in the field.

We have proposed special treatment for the pre-accession strategy: humanitarian assistance and macro-financial assistance with fully integrated management.

That means, for example, transferring the residual SCR functions for PHARE to the Directorate-General for Enlargement.

We have proposed taking urgent measures to tackle the backlog of old and dormant projects.

We are writing to the relevant chairmen of parliamentary committees and to the Court of Auditors to explain our approach.

I do not want to go on for very much longer, except to say this: where will the resources come from to manage and run our programmes in the proposed office, Europe Aid, rather better in the future than we have managed in the past?

We have to take our turn with others in the Commission in arguing our corner in the peer group process for the assistance we think is required to manage our programmes effectively.

We may, as a result, present the budgetary authority with a rectifying letter to the 2001 budget proposals in September.

The simple point I want to make is this: we cannot go on as we have.

In my judgement it is simply not an option.

We are not bidding for a bigger empire.

The budgetary authority will ultimately have to judge the right scale of European Union external aid programmes.

However, my only aim is to put the Commission in a position where it can run these programmes competently.

I have to say very bluntly to Parliament that there are two possibilities: either the budgetary authority agrees with our ideas and will then try to implement them from 2001, or else, in order to manage what our programmes amount to more competently, we will be obliged to propose very large cuts.

We cannot go on in a situation in which we are not prepared to provide the resources to manage effectively the money that is voted by the budgetary authority for our external assistance programmes.

We have to be prepared to face up to the management and administrative consequences of what we are trying to do around the world, otherwise the people who suffer are those who should be receiving our help to enable them to read and write or live a better and healthier life or create the institutions of good governance in their communities.

They are the people who suffer as well as the European Union's reputation.

I am sure this will be a long debate.

I am sure that Parliament will have a considerable contribution to make to the discussion over the next few months.

However, my impression after a few months in this job is that Parliament wants as badly as the Commission to deliver a more competently run assistance programme all around the world.

Mr President, this is refreshing - the fact that the European Union is acknowledging that there are problems but that we have solutions.

Commissioner Nielson will recall that a couple of months ago I suggested that it might be the case that he could become an emperor without clothes.

Is it not the case now that this proposal, taking away so much from DG Development as it does, is likely to make my prediction come true?

Secondly, at the end of what Commissioner Patten was saying, I think he reiterated what he was quoted as saying in "The Times" this morning where he said that Member States should back his plans with resources or cut aid.

I have to say, Commissioners, that I find this a deeply worrying and dangerous statement and likely to be taken at its face value by Member States and not in the way that you suggest.

I would very much appreciate clarification of those two questions by one or other Commissioner.

Mr President, I do not feel like an emperor without clothes, but you can judge for yourself.

The situation is that we had to do something not just to integrate the project cycle in terms of the line management of activities. We also had to do something concerning squaring the circle organisationally giving substance to my political overall responsibility for development policy.

We have done this without changing the portfolios that were defined.

The solution we have reached is to create a board of directors which will oversee and politically be the managerial part of running the new office or EuropeAid or whatever SCR is going to be called.

My role on that board will be that of the chief executive officer.

Commissioner Patten will be chairman, reflecting the position he already has at the head of the table being the ultimate coordinator of all RELEX Commissioners' activities.

We are in a sense structuring the political roles that have been defined and we are doing it in such a way that I think it really does have a chance of functioning.

There are two elements in this which will contribute to better coherence and better political consistency.

One is what I have already mentioned with a closer political involvement in the management of the actual implementation.

The other one is the quality-support group which will have its secretariat in DG Development.

The role is to make sure that the formulation of the different programmes, including those in DG RELEX, is consistent with the policy and principles that we have defined.

All in all, I think this is a good attempt at doing things given the way things were defined last July.

This will also concentrate a lot of attention among all RELEX Commissioners on the problem of whether or not we actually are delivering.

We have to get out of the culture of commitment and into the culture of delivering.

What we are doing here will be part of that change.

We also talk about ownership in our partner countries as being a major problem.

The reality, because of the way we are organised in the Commission, is that ownership on our side is extremely vague and problematic.

This is going to change as a consequence of the reform we are putting forward now.

Finally, I will address the issue of the risk of what happens if we do not get the staff and the resources to do the job.

Clearly continuing the way things are now is not acceptable, it is not possible.

We have to make the point as clearly as Commissioner Patten just did which means that we want those resources.

We have commitments, we have an agreement with 71 ACP states, we have the Member States backing that and accepting the next ninth European Development Fund.

All this is part of the promises we have made already, so there is really no alternative to getting the people to do the job.

But how to do it - this is a problem we cannot solve alone, which is why we are appealing as strongly and clearly as we are; and we make no secret of the fact that if the budget authority will not make it possible to get the staff, we will not be able to do the job.

This is the situation as we see it.

We do not want to invest our own role as Commissioners in fighting a losing battle.

We want to fight a battle we can be proud of participating in.

Mr President, I am very happy to hear that, in order to fulfil commitments, more resources and personnel are required.

As Parliament is aware of this, we will offer our full support.

However, I would like to ask a question, since I have not had time to study the document at length. What will happen to humanitarian aid?

We understand that the Union' s policy of humanitarian aid does not end with simply granting it, but it has to continue - we talk in this context of a 'continuum' - so that development policies can be carried out.

Otherwise, we may see a repetition of what is happening in Mozambique at the moment: clearly, humanitarian aid was removed, ECHO disappeared, development policy is no longer being implemented and therefore, violence may erupt once again.

Within this 'continuum' I would like to know whether, as has been the case until now, ECHO will be an office dependent on the Commission, but whose action will be based on development policies aimed at what we want to see, and that is the eradication of poverty.

Mr President, it is a shame that Mr Patten had to leave so soon.

I actually wanted to put my question to him.

But I think that Mr Nielson is equally well placed to answer me because he has been standing by his colleague' s side and he also said that both Commissioners were responsible for the proposal.

Mr Nielson, of course we here in Parliament share your aim of providing quicker aid to men and women, and raising the profile of the European Union.

But we had all agreed that what the Commission wanted to introduce now by way of reform had to be done jointly with us.

When Mr Patten says in his presentation that either the Commission programme is accepted or we must make cuts, I find that highly displeasing.

It is we who are the budgetary authority, or at least part of it, and I think that the Commission cannot simply say we shall make cuts or we shall have to make cuts.

That, if you please, has to go through the budgetary procedure first and what is certain is that you will have to implement your reform programme jointly with us.

I should like to know what your colleague meant by this threat.

Mr President, I am very sorry that Commissioner Patten had to leave.

In his absence I am delighted to direct my questions to the Development Commissioner, Mr Nielson.

I am delighted to hear of new innovations and reorganisations which the Commission is going to put into place.

EuropeAid would be a very important attribute of the European Union as far as our external relations are concerned.

It has been extremely embarrassing so far that some of our promises have not been kept.

Not keeping promises to the poorest people in the world is not the nicest way to go about - as a rich part of the world - trying to help them.

Consolidating the RELEX Commissioners and increasing the management support staff and resources have my fullest support.

I am also delighted to hear that they are planning to create a board very much like the World Bank.

But I should like to ask Commissioner Nielson if he has thought about something which is very important to this side of the House - the IFC in the World Bank has the ability to help in the private sector with funding.

Micro-credits and various other mechanisms are key to helping people to help themselves.

Have they considered extending, in EuropeAid, some element of helping people to help themselves through an investment arm where the European Union becomes a partner in venture and enterprise?

Firstly, ECHO is not affected by this reform of development assistance.

This is clearly part of what we have decided.

The only issue is to create a better link or bridge between the phase of humanitarian assistance and the more forward-oriented, long-term development assistance.

This is a well established discussion.

We want to keep ECHO more or less the way it is.

I have confidence that with the new director of ECHO we are on track.

To Mrs Haug I should like to make it clear that Commissioner Patten was saying that we will have to propose deep cuts in the level of activity if we do not get a positive response from the budget authorities concerning the staff issue.

Why are we saying this as clearly as we are, even running the risk of being interpreted as if issuing a threat?

I noticed your choice of word there.

We think it is necessary to make it clear that we seriously think it is problematic to continue without the resources and the manpower that we need.

It is not possible to do this well without being more or less organised like other well-performing donors.

It may very well be the case that we are being misunderstood in this Parliament because, on this matter, we are definitely among friends.

So saying it as clearly as we do here may sound wrong.

But there are other elements around.

We have to say it à tous azimuts.

It is absolutely necessary to make these measures clear.

I do not mean to be negative about ministers of finance, but sometimes they can be quite demanding partners in discussion.

Development ministers are not that unproblematic either.

The biggest problem is actually the lack of consistency between the level of ambition defined in this field and the resources and tools that we have available to carry out the job.

We will be making a positive effort to get a solution that makes it possible to continue at least at the level of activity that we have now.

I should like to add that, though it is right to point out the backlog, the problems and the embarrassment, it should not be forgotten that we are building roads out there, thousands of kilometres in length; we are drilling bore-holes for clean, safe water, giving millions of people access to safe drinking water every year.

We are investing in people in primary education in a large number of countries.

We are making a contribution to the debt initiative second to none, even comparing ourselves with the biggest countries in the world.

We would welcome a little more competition as far as that is concerned.

I warn against giving the impression our development cooperation activities have all but stopped.

We have to be realistic, clear and demanding in order to enter the primary league amongst donors and not to remain where we are right now.

Mr Deva, we will, as part of the new Suva Agreement - the successor to the Lomé Convention - be including in our activities a EUR 2.2 billion private investment facility which will be administered by the European Investment Bank at arm's length.

It will deal with private partners, inspiring and helping the creation of business activities between European companies and business in the developing ACP countries.

This major innovation is being prepared right now on the same basis as you were talking about.

Micro-credit is a big thing but it is not the only answer to all problems.

However, we are quite active in this field also.

I thank Parliament for what I sense to be a more than positive reception because the critical notes that I have heard are of a kind that I would tend to interpret as enthusiastic support.

We should be careful not to end up facing a situation where there is a real threat of having to set our sights lower.

Thank you very much, Mr Nielson, for your optimistic view of the future.

The next item is Question Time (B5-0220/2000).

We will examine questions to the Commission.

Subject: Jailing of opposition politician Xu Wenli in China Is the Commission aware of the recent trial involving Xu Wenli in China and the severe prison sentence that was imposed.

What action did the Commission take?

The Commission is aware of the recent trial referred to by the honourable Member in his question and of the sentence imposed on Mr Liu, who assisted Xu Wenli in setting up a branch of the banned China Democracy Party.

Xu Wenli, one of the founders of the CDP, was sentenced to 13 years in jail in December 1998, along with two other prominent democracy campaigners.

As the honourable Member will know, the longstanding policy of the Union is to raise the individual cases of Chinese citizens who have been in prison for political offences with the Chinese authorities, particularly in the context of the human rights dialogue, the last meeting of which took place on 25 February this year.

The Union has therefore raised with the Chinese Government the cases of Xu Wenli and others who have been trying to exercise basic rights that are specified by the United Nation's Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which was actually signed by China in October 1998.

To date, the Commission knows that at least 23 CDP members have been jailed for subversion as a result of their efforts to exercise those rights to which China is committed.

In relation to these and other cases, the Commission consistently calls upon the People's Republic of China to comply with the letter and spirit of the United Nation's human rights conventions which it has signed; to do so even before China's ratification of those conventions and actively to pursue ratification.

These efforts by the Commission will continue.

I thank you, Commissioner, for your answer and I should like to ask whether the Commission is aware that 14 months into his 13-year prison sentence Mr Xu is suffering from hepatitis and there are serious doubts as to the effectiveness of the medical treatment he is receiving.

I would seek an assurance that the Commission will enquire into this and ask the Chinese authorities whether they are providing the appropriate medical treatment.

Bearing in mind, Commissioner, what you said about your willingness to raise individual cases, could I also ask you to make enquiries about the fate of Rebiya Kadeer.

She was arrested on 11 August 1999 in Urumqui, the capital of the XUAR, while on her way to meet representatives of the US Congressional Research Service.

She was charged with providing secret information to foreigners and is believed to have been sentenced to eight years' imprisonment at a secret trial.

I will gladly provide more detailed information on that, Mr Commissioner.

It makes me even more angry that European Union Member States, faced with these cases and the 23 in general you referred to, show such spinelessness in refusing to support the US initiative in Geneva at the UN Commission on Human Rights attacking China's human rights record.

I should like to tell the honourable Member that in respect to Mr Xu, I will convey what he said about the apparently grave condition of that political prisoner to my colleagues in the external relations area.

I am certain that they will follow previous practice in making enquiries of the Chinese authorities as to the quality and consistency of the treatment of Mr Xu for hepatitis.

I know that my colleagues will be happy to respond to the honourable Member in order to keep him informed with any information they are able to obtain.

So far as Miss Kadeer is concerned, obviously I did not have notice of that question and am not in a position to respond.

The question will, however, have been recorded.

I will bring it to the attention of my colleagues and they will provide the honourable Member with the response he is seeking.

Obviously, it would be a matter of great concern if someone, whose only offence is to be antagonistic towards an existing regime, were to be the victim of insufferable treatment.

I know that my colleagues elsewhere in the Commission share this view, which I share with the honourable Member.

As the author is not present, Question No 33 lapses.

Subject: The Commission's reform programme and enlargement On 1 March 2000, the Commission adopted the White Paper on the reform of the Commission.

The measures and actions announced in the White Paper provide for a radical reform of the Commission which will involve a considerable amount of time.

Can the Commission indicate to what extent the present reform proposals take account of the forthcoming enlargement?

Do they anticipate the consequences which enlargement will have on the internal structure of the Commission and do the proposed measures and actions take account of such consequences?

If not, would it not have been more logical for the Commission to take account of enlargement in respect of certain aspects, thereby avoiding a situation whereby shortly after completion of the current reform process the Commission has to enter into a fresh round of reforms to cope with the impact of enlargement?

Does the Commission intend to present an action plan with a timetable, as is the case with the present reform plan, in order to prepare the structure of the Commission for the forthcoming enlargement?

The Commission's reform strategy White Paper fulfils the undertakings readily given to Parliament and to the Council last year to give immediate attention to addressing the way in which the Institution, as an organisation, currently undertakes its duties.

Delay in designing a practical strategy and in pursuing necessary modernisation would not have been acceptable to the Commission, to the Council, to this Parliament or to the public, as I am sure the honourable Member understands.

One of the specifically stated purposes of comprehensive reform is the development of strengthened administrative performance which will, amongst other things, enable the Commission to deal more effectively with changes in the current and the future Union and in the wider world.

Clearly the challenges posed by the forthcoming extensive enlargement are different in nature and scale than those presented by any previous enlargement.

The Commission must therefore be capable of achieving the highest standards of executive and administrative performance in the discharge of its powers and duties in order to facilitate that massive and welcome development.

As the College of Commissioners made clear in our introduction to the White Paper, and elsewhere in that document, and I quote what we said: "the challenges of globalisation and future enlargement require better governance at all levels including the European Union".

All political institutions must rise to this challenge and so must the Commission.

Reform is therefore an essential precondition - a precondition for realising our vision of Europe.

The current administrative reform is not a limited exercise - it is an evolutionary process as we have made very clear - it will be continuously monitored and the results achieved will be assessed in order to provide for any relevant adjustments.

Proper account will be taken of any specific requirements that arise from the enlargement process, and naturally that will apply to human resources implications of the ongoing change.

Issues such as the management of the increased cultural diversity within the Commission and an early retirement scheme that is directly linked to enlargement will, for instance, be amongst those that receive particular attention.

As with past enlargements, specific measures concerning the appointment and integration of officials from the new Member States will be adopted at the appropriate time.

I would like to thank the Commissioner for his response.

I would, however, like to add something.

One of the main challenges in the enlargement process will be to tailor the veterinary and plant-health conditions prevalent in the acceding countries to those in the European Union.

Would the Commissioner be prepared to encourage observers from the Central and Eastern European countries that wish to join the EU, to attend management committees, scientific committees or any other committees concerned with veterinary and plant health, on a permanent basis?

Mr President, the honourable Member's approach to these and many other matters is I know extremely constructive.

What I know on the basis of precedent, and also the Commission's assessment of the scope and the depth of the challenges that arise from the forthcoming enlargement, is that appropriate measures will be taken at the right time not only in terms of the recruitment and integration of properly skilled staff from the new Member States but also to assist with the preparation of other areas of expertise - presumably including the Scientific and other committees.

To some extent, of course, the process will be assisted by the fact that the international science community inside and outside the European Union is genuinely international.

In addition to relying upon those casual professional relationships, I am sure that the Commission will want to ensure that there is continuity and access provided for those new incoming Member States not only in areas like those that he has mentioned - veterinary and plant health - but in many other areas where the smoothest possible integration of efforts is a matter of crucial and mutual importance.

Subject: Boarding of Community vessels by Canadian inspectors in international waters Five years after the seizure of the Estai, the Community fleet fishing in NAFO international waters has expressed deep concern at the boarding of a Portuguese vessel, the Santa Mafalda, supposedly by Canadian inspectors.

The Santa Mafalda, a vessel used to catch halibut, was boarded on 24 April last. The inspectors confiscated all documentation and refused to leave the vessel.

Furthermore, a launch belonging to the Canadian authorities has been tracking the vessel constantly, thus hampering its fishing activity.

A few days earlier, Canadian inspectors had apparently boarded a Spanish freezer trawler, which was also fishing in international waters.

European fishermen fear that the underlying aim of these boarding incidents is to deter them from using the fishing grounds in which they catch halibut and cod.

What information does the Commission possess on these incidents?

Can it clarify whether the inspectors were acting on behalf of NAFO or the Canadian Government?

Has it taken any action in this regard, or does it intend to do so?

Should accepting Community monitoring rules for inspections in NAFO waters prove problematic for Canada, what initiatives could the Commission take to set clear and binding rules which would allay the doubts of those working in the sector and the Canadian Government alike?

As the honourable Member who raised the question will know, in accordance with the Northwest Atlantic Fisheries Organisation scheme of joint international inspection and surveillance, each contracting party may assign means of inspection and inspectors to the NAFO scheme and NAFO inspectors may inspect any fishing vessel flying the flag of a contracting party.

NAFO inspectors are obliged to carry out their duties in accordance with rules set out in the NAFO scheme and they are also obliged to remain under the operational control of the authorities of their contracting parties and be responsible to them.

Against that background, on 23 April two Canadian NAFO inspectors accompanied by a trainee carried out an inspection of the Community fishing vessel Santa Mafalda which was operating at that time in the NAFO regulatory area.

The Canadian inspectors in question and the surveillance vessel from which the inspection was carried out are assigned to the NAFO scheme.

Their inspection was carried out under its auspices.

Having been informed by the Canadians, inspectors of the Commission boarded the Santa Mafalda to verify the grounds on which the Canadian inspectors based their citation of a serious infringement.

In conducting this verification the Commission inspectors ensured the security and continuity of the evidence on board and transmitted their report to the Portuguese authorities.

Those authorities in turn ordered the Santa Mafalda to the port of Aveiro in Portugal for a thorough inspection.

The Santa Mafalda arrived in Aveiro on 10 May 2000 and two Commission inspectors participated in a thorough inspection of the vessel.

The Commission has drawn the attention of the Canadian authorities to the procedures followed by the Canadian inspectors in relation to their seizure of documentation and their continued stay on board the Santa Mafalda.

The Commission takes the view that the Canadian NAFO inspectors in question acted in breach of the NAFO scheme by taking away documents from the vessel without the permission of the master and by continuing to stay on board the vessel.

However, it is relevant to note that in this case the master of the vessel and the Portuguese authorities did not oppose the prolonged stay of the Canadian inspectors on the vessel and the fishing activities of the Santa Mafalda were not obstructed.

Mr Commissioner, I am satisfied with your reply, but I would like to add something else. The sea is a difficult world, and the Community fleet which fishes in international Atlantic waters experiences the interference of controllers and patrols from coastal countries which give the impression that, behind the harassment they sometimes suffer, there is one sole intention; to expel them from those fishing grounds.

The Commissioner knows, as I do, that the current situation in the NAFO is not, fortunately, what it was five years ago after the seizure of the Estai.

The European Commission - like the fishing sector itself - has made significant efforts to iron out our differences.

However, there are still outstanding questions, such as the extraterritorial clauses, which allow the Canadian Government to carry out inspections, controls and seizures beyond their national waters, in open sea, which is incompatible with international provisions and which, all too frequently, involves the arbitrary application of controls within the framework of the NAFO.

For all these reasons, I would like to ask the Commissioner how the European Commission intends to defend the right of the Community fleet to fish freely in these waters, albeit within the existing rules.

Mr President, I am grateful to the honourable lady.

The only way in which we can actually ensure the proper maintenance of an international convention which has the effect of law is to demand on all occasions that the procedures required under the law are fulfilled properly in a balanced but a completely full way.

That is the position being taken by the Commission which is why I drew attention to the fact that the Commissioners have already reached the conclusion that the Canadian inspectors actually acted in breach of the scheme by taking documents without the sight of the master and by virtue, maybe, of their very prolonged stay on board that vessel.

The Portuguese authorities, as the honourable lady will know because of her interest, are now undertaking a full investigation and it would therefore not be proper for the Commission to communicate opinions beyond those I have already offered, but she can be absolutely certain that the Commission and its inspectors together with the Member States are vigilant in sustaining the proper rights of all vessels on the high seas.

Mr President, I had asked the question as a result of Mr Kinnock' s first reply, before Mrs Miguélez asked her question.

I had understood from Mr Kinnock that the ship was in fact being inspected in a Portuguese port and that this inspection had taken place in the presence of Community inspectors.

I understand, from his second reply, that he does not yet have the result of that inspection.

That is what I wanted him to clarify.

If he does have it, I would like him to say so, but I understand from his second reply that he does not.

If that is the case I believe it would be prudent and logical for us to await the final result.

I would ask Mr Kinnock to communicate to Mr Fischler that, as chairman of the Committee on Fisheries, I would like to know the result of that inspection as soon as possible.

I would like to receive it because this Parliament will have to act accordingly.

In any event, I would like to condemn, in support of Mrs Miguélez, the abuse of authority on the part of the Canadian NAFO inspectors which Mr Kinnock mentioned.

I would therefore like to make that request and condemn this violation of NAFO regulations.

Mr President, I will draw the honourable Member's remarks to the attention of my colleague, Mr Fischler, and I know that they will be of interest to him.

He summarises the position precisely because the inspection has taken place and the Portuguese authorities are reaching their conclusions.

It would not be proper publicly to pursue the matter further, but when the report of that inspection and the assessment by the Portuguese authorities are available, I am certain that they will be communicated to interested Members including, of course, the chairman of Parliament's Committee on Fisheries and I am certain the honourable lady whose interest is manifest.

One of the greatest benefits of the question time arrangement is the way in which it endows me with instant expertise on issues as far apart as fishing, olive oil and human rights in China!

I am happy to respond to Mr Korakas.

In June 1998, the Commission undertook to present a proposal on the future of the common organisation of the market in olive oil to the Council and Parliament in 2000.

The new regime would apply from the 2001/2002 marketing year which, as the honourable Member will know, begins on 1 November 2001.

The Commission is currently studying new data on the structure of olive oil production in the various producer Member States, as well as developments in the world market where the Community is the leading producer by a considerable margin.

The study will also take into account the need to draw up an olive oil quality strategy in order to add more value to the product.

As far as product promotion is concerned, the Community is already financing promotion campaigns through the International Olive Oil Council.

Those campaigns appear to have a positive effect within the European Union and indeed in third countries.

In response to a specific issue raised by the honourable Member's question, I have to point out that the produce of new plantings would not give entitlement to aid.

However, the Commission hopes that the Community producers concerned will benefit fully under derogations from the rules as they relate to approved planting programmes, although the olive oil in question would count towards the maximum guaranteed quantity which has already been set.

Finally, the Commission wishes to point out that rather than simply abolishing the intervention system, what has actually happened is that it has been replaced by a system of private storage which is more flexible than the intervention system because it applies throughout the marketing year if the market situation calls for such support.

Since the start of the 1998/99 marketing year, it has not been necessary to pay private storage aid.

However, it is worth emphasising that over that same period the old buying-in intervention system would not have been activated either.

Mr President, we do indeed appear to be having problems understanding each other in this Chamber.

Because of the policies of the European Union, olive oil producers are truly at the mercy of big producers who negotiate among themselves and try to buy olive oil at unbelievably low prices.

This situation has reached dramatic proportions with the abolition of the albeit downgraded intervention system and the system of private storage, let me assure you is, quite frankly, a joke.

So how are we to deal with this situation?

Will an improved intervention system providing rudimentary protection for producers be reintroduced?

And given that, on a global scale, olive oil is so important to the human body and plays such an important role in maintaining farming populations in disadvantaged areas, why is it that the quotas, particularly for Greece, are so low?

Are you going to increase them?

And with the widespread practice of mixing olive oil with sunflower seed oil, what does the Commission intend to do to put a stop to this practice, which is harming producers and consumers to the benefit of industrial racketeers?

In this spirit, does the Commission believe that this phenomenon can be tackled through guile, i.e., by increasing the quota for Italy, which is the main country responsible for mixing oil, and reducing the quota for Greece?

I am grateful to the honourable Member and I know of the deep concerns he voices.

They certainly are communicated in this House and he does it in a most articulate fashion.

All I can say to him at this juncture, because I know this is a matter of continuing concern and activity by him, is that the CMO for olive oil is due to be reformed, as I indicated earlier, by 1 November 2001, following agreement in the Council and in this Parliament in adopting Regulation 1638/98.

I cannot assume that if the situation were precisely as the honourable Member describes, and smaller producers were in a dangerously disadvantaged position by comparison with the big producers, there would have been such agreement in the Council and in this House.

Therefore, I hope he will give attention to the results of the studies I mentioned being undertaken at the moment by the Commission, both in terms of the general questions he raised when he submitted his question and also in terms of the relative fortunes of big producers and small producers.

Finally, as someone who is merely a consumer of olive oil, I hope there is no extensive dilution of what is one of my favourite complementary foodstuffs and that, whatever else we do in the European Community, we strive together with olive oil producers of all sizes to maintain the maximum quality.

That is how we sustain our considerable lead in world markets.

Thank you very much, Mr Kinnock, for your cooperation during this Question Time.

We also congratulate you for using olive oil, which is very good for the health.

I also say this from a Mediterranean standpoint.

Subject: Further integration entailed by EMU In the Commission's estimation, to what extent do the requirements imposed by EMU on economic policy - which include permanently fixed exchange rates - create the need for further economic integration in the form of a more extensive common budget (a common fiscal policy), cyclical transfers between Member States, increased labour mobility between the participating states and/or a more flexible labour market?

The introduction of the euro will increase economic integration and reinforce the positive effects of the single market, primarily by eliminating the risks relating to exchange rates.

There are also other factors. There is greater transparency in prices, an improvement in competition and an increase in trade and investment both cross-border and also between other countries or areas affected by monetary union.

At the same time, as the common monetary policy will mean the same interest rate for all Member States of the monetary union, it will not only have an effect in terms of developing demand, but it will also mean greater integration of the financial markets.

This should also bring benefits for savers and investors.

For this to have the greatest positive effect, it is essential that we carry out a policy of rationalised public finances, which will not generate tensions in monetary policy itself, and at the same time, a decisive policy of structural reforms and a competition policy, which will allow the maximum benefit to be drawn from the process.

In order for economic and monetary union to function successfully, we do not need a major budget which will allow cyclical transfers in the event of difficulties.

I believe that the Treaty, supplemented by the Stability and Growth Pact, provides adequate instruments to implement an economic policy which is compatible with a unified monetary policy.

The basic framework which we have introduced is a framework of mutual supervision of national fiscal policies and of coordination of economic policies by means of processes to improve our structural situations and the coordination or creation of a positive macroeconomic environment which will favour growth and employment, and at the same time reduce the possibility of asymmetric clashes caused by economic policies.

Budgetary consolidation itself, which is, of course, the reduction of the public deficit, gives each Member State room to act in adverse situations.

Greater labour mobility may certainly help to confront the problems which may arise in the event of asymmetric clashes.

Both an increase in the available work force and an improvement in productivity would improve the situation in terms of creating jobs and helping to reduce unemployment.

That is why we attach particular importance to labour mobility.

The Commission has therefore insisted on its various strategies regarding the specific point of labour mobility, while remaining aware that this is a difficult issue.

It is difficult within Member States and it is difficult between one Member State and another, due not only to historical and cultural incompatibilities in terms of education, but also to a series of other aspects related to this type of situation.

Finally, I would say that clearly these difficulties which are being considered - and which may arise in the future - will surely be much less serious than those which have been brought up in theory by people who study monetary union, given that - and this is our experience to date - we are seeing an approximation of the economic policies of the countries and we have created room, in monetary terms, for us to confront difficulties more easily than in the past.

Thank you very much for your answer which, up to a point, contains many of the features I had expected.

I should like to follow up your answer and ask you what is meant by saying that the euro project will not be a success unless there is a large budget which can cope with fluctuations in the trade cycle.

Is it a large EU budget which is being considered?

I should also like to hear whether it can be imagined continuing with a policy based upon recommendations and exhortations to the euro zone countries.

For example, Denmark has, in fact, on a number of occasions disregarded recommendations from the Commission.

Is this state of affairs to be accepted in the long term or will the Stability and Growth Pact be followed up and a stable environment ensured for EMU by adopting working methods of a type different from those involving recommendations and exhortations?

In your reply - or comment - I note two implicit questions.

Firstly, a major budget is essential to tackle the cyclical difficulties.

This would lead us into a very complex debate. The problems are not caused by clashes themselves, but by asymmetric clashes; asymmetric clashes differ depending on whether they are temporary or permanent, whether they relate to supply or demand.

We have little experience to help us define a typology and lay down a single formula for resolving these difficulties by budgetary means.

We believe that it is a much better idea to establish a general framework of economic health, of good economic behaviour, which will allow us to confront the difficulties in the case in question.

In the future we will continue with recommendations to comply with the stability and growth pact.

I do not know whether it is a good or a bad thing, but that is our obligation as the Commission.

This is an agreement adopted by the Council of Ministers as a result of initiatives by certain Member States and which I also support, since I believe that a good budgetary policy provides greater room for manoeuvre in the event of difficulties.

Earlier I referred to the fact that the situation is different in each of the Member States.

In this year' s recommendations we have taken particular account of the Commission' s own analyses regarding what the margins are, and which benchmarks we are setting in each of the Member States to tackle the crisis without exceeding the 3% public deficit, which is the figure we have established as a reference.

We can see that that situation is different in each of the countries and, therefore, our recommendations and our comments will always be different in each of the countries, although this is not the only aspect that we take into consideration.

Mr President, the current weakness and volatility of the euro is a cause of concern both within and outside the euro-zone.

Does the Commissioner feel that the current stability pact and the powers of the European Central Bank are sufficient to force the Euro-land states to make the difficult and fundamental adjustments in their economic and labour markets, which are essential if the euro is going to be taken seriously by the global financial markets?

I do not see any great correlation between the two questions, but I do note that the euro is being taken seriously.

What has happened with the euro?

There are many technical explanations as to why we are in this situation.

This would require a broader debate, focussing on the starting point, which is the development of economic forecasts and the real economies of each of the areas. It would also clearly concern changes in interest rates and certain other technical elements, such as expiry dates for certain types of issues etc.

The reality is that, by analysing the euro on the basis, fundamentally, of the evolution of the exchange rate, we are making an incorrect evaluation of its introduction.

The euro has been a great success, in terms of its introduction, in terms of issuing it as a currency, in terms of the consolidation of an excellent economic situation in Europe and in terms of the forecasts for the future.

It is true that the interest rate is not what we would have liked.

We believe that a strong economy means a strong euro.

We also believe that the development of growth in Europe will be strong throughout 2000 and, as a result, we will match US growth by the end of this year.

In these circumstances, we believe that the value of the euro will be rising in the coming months.

Therefore, despite a certain degree of concern - because that concern exists within public opinion - about the evolution of the euro, we believe that this situation will be corrected and that it should be considered to be temporary rather than permanent.

Mr President, in my opinion, the supplementary question by Mr Purvis was most pertinent, since recently the need for increased economic cooperation amongst the EMU countries has been justified by precisely this weakening of the value of the euro in relation to the US dollar.

The reason for the dollar becoming stronger in comparison to the euro is simply that the national economy of the USA is stronger than that of the euro countries.

Hundreds of thousands of new jobs have recently been created in the USA, while the number of jobs in Europe has been cut.

I would like to ask the Commissioner firstly, whether the Commission admits that the weakening of the euro that has been much thrashed out in public, is a consequence of the infrastructural problems and lack of dynamism of the EU economy, particularly in relation to the USA, and whether he really believes that the kind of Keynesian action as proposed by Mrs Frahm would be the cure for this weakening of the euro, and whether he believes that the Commission will achieve better results in this matter, when the national governments of France and Germany have actually proceeded in the totally opposite direction, and their actions have weakened even further the competitiveness of the euro area.

As an example, I refer here to the decisions made by the French Government on working hours.

I will try to reply briefly, although these are complex questions and I will therefore have to give this point some attention.

Firstly, with regard to increasing cooperation in terms of coordinating economic policies, I believe that it is necessary and positive and is one of the elements which is emerging from this current crisis.

The French President has highlighted this and it will obviously be a point for debate during the next presidency.

I do not agree with the theory that the euro' s development is leading to a fall in employment in Europe and an increase in employment in the USA.

Transfers of capital may generate additional activity in the United States, but the positive increase in exports is generating activity in Europe.

It would require a very complex and profound debate to deal with this issue.

In any event, what I do believe - as I said earlier - is that the euro, at the moment, has an exchange rate which, if we analyse it in relation to its components and its historical situation, is not that different from situations which have existed at other times.

I am convinced that this is a transitional situation which will improve during this year.

Mr President, despite the fact that I was born next to the Murcia region, it is difficult for me to analyse, in Community terms, the problems of the precarious employment there.

Therefore, allow me to make a rather more general comment.

The assessment of the labour market reforms which have resulted from the processes we have established in the Union - the Luxembourg process and the broad guidelines for economic policy - demonstrates that the reforms of the regulations on the labour market in the different countries are making a positive and significant contribution to greater economic growth and to promoting the creation of employment and the greater participation of men and women in the labour market.

The broad guidelines of economic policy and the recommendations for employment have never advocated a simple deregulation of the labour market, as the question states.

Together with the reform of certain labour market regulations, they also include, for example, the need to adopt measures which will promote entrepreneurial spirit or active labour market policies - and we state this quite deliberately - to improve employment opportunities.

The measures adopted in each Member State must be adapted to the problems and reality of each of them.

It is also quite normal for the Commission to insist on the need to hold debates and make agreements with social partners so that they may actively participate in the changes to the labour market in each country.

As well as a significant and lasting increase in the levels of employment, one of the key priorities of the employment strategy is to improve the quality of jobs.

The recent Lisbon Summit gave a new impulse to the Union' s economic and social agenda and we have also insisted on this point by talking of more and better employment.

I would also like to highlight, as a fundamental contribution to the consolidation of the progress made until now, the promotion and maintenance of rigorous regulations on health and safety at work, which has been one of the most prominent issues in the debate held in the Commission, which advocates better jobs in Europe.

Labour market reforms directed at improving employment opportunities and workers' ability to adapt to these new opportunities in no way seek to undermine working conditions or health and safety at work.

In accordance with its legal competence as laid down in the Treaty, the Commission has kept up the necessary efforts to implement and propose various legal instruments and monitor the incorporation of the acquis communautaire in this area.

With regard to your specific question and the case of Spain, it is Spain' s responsibility, like the other Members, to apply the Commission' s directives.

It is also the responsibility of the Member States to monitor the application of these directives in all of their regions.

The Commission must guarantee that those directives are transposed into national law correctly and, clearly, to monitor all the issues relating to its application, which is the responsibility of the national authorities.

I am grateful to Mr Solbes for the intention behind his reply, which is to safeguard and show concern for worker' s conditions.

Nevertheless, the political analysis of the Lisbon Summit reveals that there were two proposals: one which was more social, more committed, which came from the French Prime Minister, Mr Jospin, and the other, resulting from a previous agreement between Mr Blair and Mr Aznar, deregulating the labour market and making it more flexible.

The latter proposal won the day.

If we take Spain as an example, it is clear that job instability, temporary employment and work accidents are on the increase.

Do you not therefore believe that it would be appropriate, in the review of the Treaty of Amsterdam, to incorporate the Social Charter with specific instruments and measures, as occurred with the five classic points of the Treaty of Maastricht, in order to guarantee full employment and employment quality and that it therefore not be left to the whim of each of the countries?

By way of clarification, reference has been made to the number of work accidents in Murcia because it has such a sad record within Spain; that is why we are concerned.

I imagined that was the reason for the reference to Murcia, and not the fact that I was born next to that province.

With regard to the basic problem, I would make a different comment.

Our concern has always been not only greater employment but also greater quality of employment.

In the broad guidelines for economic policy for this year, and in the specific recommendation for Spain, we expressly refer to the need for the problems to be analysed, amongst them the cost of dismissal, which may be important with regard to temporary employment, because we believe that a distinction should be made between precariousness and flexibility, which are two very different things.

Nevertheless, you introduced a second element in your supplementary question which, in my opinion, is of great interest: Why do we not establish the objective of full employment in the same way that we established the objectives of the Treaty of Maastricht at the time?

Basically because they are two completely different types of figure.

At Maastricht, what we put in place was compliance with obligations dependent on voluntary decisions adopted by the Member States which form the European Union.

In the case of full employment, the figure is the consequence of measures which are intended to achieve an objective, but which do not have a causal relationship which guarantees its objective.

What we can consider is what is being done in the various employment programmes, and that is the implementation of certain elements which will allow us to move towards full employment.

When we spoke of full employment in the Commission document which served as a basis for the debate in Lisbon, we expressly said that if we add the development of the economy in accordance with currently available figures to the various determining factors and policies proposed by the Commission, full employment will be achieved.

However, this cannot be a political objective, as in Maastricht, because it does not depend on the will of the different governments or on a specific decision by each one of them.

I would like to say that, in order to judge from afar, it is often necessary to understand the reality.

In the countries of the Southern Mediterranean, and specifically in the region of Murcia, they have, in recent years, stopped managing unemployment and started to manage employment.

They have moved from an extraordinary and terrifying level of unemployment, originating in the great state industries whose economic model was unsustainable, through a crisis and then to a situation involving the growth of small businesses (SMBs) and economic incentives which have generated a new and vibrant model.

However, it is clear that accidents in the workplace - which I am now talking about - are a problem of education and mutual responsibility on the part of businessmen, the state, public administration and, of course, trade unions.

Unless they all work in unison, they will not achieve this objective.

In Spain, back in 1995, a law was adopted in this respect, and they are trying to comply with it, but this cannot be achieved in a day.

Therefore, Commissioner, firstly, what active policies and which economic sectors do you intend to bring into play in order to achieve better education in this particular area, so that a sense of responsibility may be developed?

Secondly and very specifically: is there any programme to educate immigrants in the language of their host country, so that we can educate them to understand the minimum safety standards in this region which is host to many immigrants who do not speak our language?

With regard to your questions, I will say again that the distribution of responsibilities between the Commission and the Member States dictates that these matters fall to the Member States.

Consequently, both the funding of these immigrant education programmes and the active policies are decisions which logically depend on which social policy the Spanish Government accepts or decides on.

Subject: Adaptation of the applicant countries Will the Commission indicate the total number of documents that have been sent to the applicant countries as well as the total volume of the 'acquis' and will it consider forms of cooperation that do not require the applicant countries to accept every rule?

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the entire Community acquis, i.e. all the legal acts of the European Union without exception were sent to the candidate countries immediately after the resolution of the Luxembourg European Council in December 1997, during the course of screening.

No-one has ever counted them and I cannot therefore tell you how many there are.

We usually talk of just over 20 000 legal acts in this context.

Mr President, there is not very much to thank the Commission for.

I find it completely incomprehensible that there should be an institution which is unable to put together elementary statistics concerning the existing rules, which is unable to add up how much money is being sent to the candidate countries, which is unable to provide some general numerical information so that ordinary people can follow what is happening and which is unable to supply the total acquis on a CD-Rom to anyone who might be interested in it.

It is really quite simple. I have worked on it for a good many years.

It is completely impossible even for organisations with academic employees to find out how extensive the 'acquis' is, and it is apparently impossible for Mr Vanhengen to give the entire acquis to a Member of the European Parliament who is quite prepared to go through it and distribute the tasks among the different employees in order to see what positions are to be adopted on its various aspects.

So there is nothing to thank the Commission for.

Mr President, Mr Bonde, we have met each other face to face here before, and I personally am having to exercise a great deal of self-control in order to maintain the necessary degree of decorum in the House.

The legal acts which we are talking about here are legal acts passed by the Council, by Parliament, by the Commission and by all the Community institutions.

You, as a member of the most important legislative institution of the European Union know full well that these legal acts have not been numbered consecutively.

I do not know of a single Member State of the European Union whose laws are numbered consecutively.

Even the laws in your country - and I have taken the trouble of finding out - are not numbered consecutively.

If you think that Commission officials are well employed if I sit them down and tell them to spend a week counting the legal acts issued since 1955, then let me tell you that I do not.

I have no intention of arranging for them to be counted.

The information which I have given you is as accurate as possible: i.e. that candidate countries are sent all, I repeat all the legal acts of the European Union without exception.

I am curious to know how it helps if I tell you that this figure is 21334 or 21425.

If you want, you sit down and do it. You can find the entire Community acquis on-line on the Celex website here in Parliament.

You tell your employees to count these legal acts, because I shall not tell mine to do so.

Mr President, Commissioner, the acquis is, of course, an important basis for accession.

Can you tell us how acquis screening is proceeding in your view?

With which candidate countries has most progress been made?

Chancellor Schröder recently stated in a press conference that the first admissions will probably be in 2002.

How do you assess the scenario if the legal inventory is completed in optimum time?

What do you think is the earliest possible date for accession if optimum use is made of all deadlines and options?

I can tell the honourable Member that screening - i.e. legislative adjustment - was of course completed with all candidates some time ago.

It is updated now and again because the European Parliament, the Council and the Commission are not idle and continue to produce legal acts, meaning that the acquis changes.

This amended acquis must, of course, be included in negotiations.

But this happens on a regular basis.

The screening process has therefore been completed with all candidates.

Your question is based on a misunderstanding.

Screening is not the same as negotiation, screening is merely an adjustment process.

Screening is used merely to identify the acquis of the European Union and how much of it already forms part of the candidate country' s legislation and how much does not.

Now you want to know how far negotiations have proceeded overall.

I know that for the Luxembourg group of countries, with which negotiations started in March 1998, between 10 and 15 out of a total of 31 negotiating chapters have been provisionally completed.

A few more will be completed during the Portuguese presidency.

But more important than the number of chapters completed is probably the number of chapters opened.

By the end of the Portuguese presidency, all 29 chapters will be on the negotiating table for the Luxembourg group of countries.

Only the chapters entitled "Institutions" and "Miscellaneous" are still closed for obvious reasons.

With the Helsinki group of countries, negotiations did not start until February of this year.

Between 5 and 8 chapters will be opened for these countries during the Portuguese presidency.

Indeed, I think that we will be able to provisionally close a whole series of chapters by the end of the Portuguese presidency, but we cannot yet forecast how many with any degree of accuracy.

In all events, the process is proceeding apace.

It is quite impossible to forecast when the negotiating process will be completed and when the first accessions will take place.

There have been intensive discussions on this over recent weeks and months.

The Commission stated quite clearly in Helsinki that an accession scenario could not be developed until all the information needed was available.

We need to clarify if the Union itself is ready for accession, i.e. if the institutional reforms have been completed, how far negotiations have progressed and, most importantly, and this will be the most difficult exercise at the end, if a candidate country is judged to be in a position to really apply and implement the acquis it has adopted.

As things stand today, I am bound to say that we cannot forecast when such a scenario will be ready.

I have said on many occasions that I would like it to be ready by the end of this year, at the Nice summit.

But whether or not that will be possible will only become apparent in the autumn of this year once we have the up-to-date progress reports on preparations for accession for each individual candidate country.

Mr President, Commissioner, my question does not concern the timetable; instead I would like to ask a question regarding a principle of enlargement.

The process of enlargement is expected to be a truly demanding one, in which there is a danger that we either become frustrated by long waiting times or compromise over the criteria by granting overlong transition periods, which will naturally cause displeasure in the old Member States.

An arrangement such as the EEA agreement may be regarded as a solution of the past, but I would nevertheless like to ask, whether the Commission could, even in principle, consider a possible solution along the lines of the EEA agreement - not as it stands but of that nature - to be used as some sort of ' hatchery' or incubator for the new Member States prior to actual membership, instead of the applicant countries having to wait for long periods of time before permanent membership becomes a reality. I would further like to ask, whether the Commission shares the view that this kind of arrangement, along the lines of the EEA agreement, could considerably reduce the costs of enlargement and promote the economic development of the applicant countries.

I hope this question was not an improper one at this time.

Madam, what you wish to engage in now is a hypothetical discussion.

This discussion was held in the first half of the 1990s and it culminated in resolutions of which you are aware, which were discussed on several occasions in Parliament and which can no longer be made retroactive, namely the resolution of the European Councils of Copenhagen, Essen and Luxembourg to prepare the Central and Eastern European Countries and Cyprus and Malta for full membership.

There is no point today in debating whether or not there might have been an alternative.

In any case, it is my recollection that the candidates were not satisfied with anything less.

They would not have accepted less and would have seen it as discrimination, meaning that, in Luxembourg in 1997, there was no longer any realistic alternative to the resolution taken in any case.

There is not a single country involved in the process which takes the view that we should depart from this objective of full membership.

If there were, I would know about it.

All 12 countries with which we are negotiating are seriously working towards the goal of full membership and I urgently advise you against opening a debate on changing the fundamental objectives of enlargement now that the process has begun.

The candidates will only see it as a serious breach of trust.

Mrs Müller, the question is based on an erroneous premise.

The chapter entitled "Free movement of services" has not been provisionally completed with any candidate country.

Nor do I expect this chapter to be completed with any country in the immediate future.

Mr President, it is certainly correct to say, Mr Verheugen, that the chapter has not been completed, but negotiations have started.

However what I am interested in is this: Have transitional arrangements in the area of the free movement of services been applied for during these negotiations?

You know, I am from a border region and I know exactly what the situation is on the ground.

I am convinced that medium-sized companies and the craft industry will face huge problems and enormous challenges when it comes to the free movement of services, because there is a huge wage differential of 1:10 at present.

You yourself know full well which industries are affected.

Is there any intention on the European side to apply for transitional arrangements in the area of the free movement of services?

The Czech Republic has already applied for transition periods for the acquisition of land by foreigners and this will have an impact on services.

What is your position on the transition periods which the Czech Republic has applied for and what is the Commission' s position in general on this point?

Mr President, Mrs Müller, I assume that you know that accession negotiations take the form of a state conference at which the Member States, not the Commission, negotiate and I am not therefore entitled to divulge the content of negotiations which have not yet been completed.

I would gladly do so, but I am not allowed to.

However, I can still answer the question, because the Commission naturally has an opinion on the points which you raised.

First, the Commission takes the view that transition periods should only be considered during the enlargement process if the aim of enlargement cannot otherwise be achieved within the required time or by the required date.

Transition periods must be very, very limited in both scope and duration, especially where the internal market is at stake.

You must know that every transition period, irrespective of whom it benefits, suspends the internal market for that area.

And if a large number of transition periods are agreed, then we can forget the whole idea of the internal market for years to come.

That cannot be the meaning of enlargement.

The question which you actually want answered is the question of how we can prepare for the problems which will arise in certain border regions following enlargement.

The region which you come from and the region which I come from are just such regions.

I have discussed this matter on many occasions in your country, as you know, and so I can be brief.

I think that there may well be transition periods in relation to the free movement of workers, which is the really difficult question.

But we have not yet reached that point.

In the area of the free movement of services, which will lead to stiffer competition in border regions, I think that we need to start preparing an action programme right now, particularly so that small and medium-sized enterprises in border regions will be capable of adapting to and withstanding this new competition.

When, a few weeks ago, I once again read the Commission' s progress report on Lithuania, it occurred to me that the progress reports are being produced as if it were the previous enlargement we were talking about, that is to say the enlargement which took place before the Treaty of Amsterdam came into force.

The Social Chapter is the corollary and counterpart of free movement of services and labour mobility.

My question is about whether the forthcoming progress reports will, to a greater degree than the previous reports, take account of employment and of the Social Chapter, which is now a part of our 'acquis' .

I believe, in fact, that we can succeed in enlarging the Union if we combine these two aspects: firstly, the free movement of services and employees and, secondly, more equal conditions when it comes to the dialogue between employers and employees.

The Social Chapter is, in fact, a part of our common regulations, with which the candidate States must also comply.

I would like to remind MEPs in general that questions during Question Time must be specific questions on specific issues, which lead to specific answers.

Everything else must take place during the normal debates of the parliamentary committees, because, otherwise, the MEPs who are due to follow will not be able to put their questions.

Having given this general warning, I give the floor to the Commissioner.

Mr President, to be honest, the underlying question was how many legal acts does the European Union have.

Now I am being asked to answer a supplementary question which very specifically concerns one candidate country.

I really cannot see the connection between these two questions, except that both relate to enlargement.

However, if you take the view that there is a connection, then I am prepared to answer the question and am able to do so.

All the acquis is taken into consideration in the progress reports on the candidate countries.

The Charter of Fundamental Rights cannot be taken into consideration because it is not yet ready.

It is only now being drafted and its legal status has not yet been recognised.

I know no better than you if this Charter will become part of the Treaty or if it will be no more than a solemn declaration.

If this Charter should become part of the Treaty, it will of course be taken into account in future progress reports and we shall report on how the details of this Charter are being taken into account in the individual countries concerned.

We must also report in the progress reports - as you will have noticed - as to whether a country is complying with the Copenhagen criteria.

That basically answers the questions, because the political criteria of Copenhagen basically cover everything which will appear in this Charter of Fundamental Rights and these questions have also been answered in relation to Lithuania and will be answered in the next progress report on Lithuania.

Mrs Thors is raising a point of order.

I wish to point out that I was not earlier referring to Mrs Thors, but to all MEPs, but you have the floor.

I would ask you not to enter into a debate with the Commissioner.

Commissioner, I just want to clarify matters as there seems to be very bad interpretation - I was not talking about the Charter of Fundamental Rights but about the Social Charter including the rights of workers.

These include working conditions which I think are a corollary to the movement of services.

What are the conditions under which services are provided?

What are the conditions under which people are working?

That is the corollary of free movement.

Mr President, I did indeed hear the words Charter of Fundamental Rights.

Of course, the Social Charter forms part of the Treaty and is therefore negotiated with all candidate countries.

It forms part of the Community acquis.

We report on how the individual candidate countries are preparing to apply the acquis, i.e. to apply the Social Charter.

I am not at the moment in a position to tell you exactly how things stand with Lithuania in particular, but I would be more than happy to give you a written reply specifically on Lithuania and the Social Charter.

Commissioner, we were in fact discussing the matter of transition periods.

I should like to ask what your position is on the wishes of Poland and the Czech Republic to introduce long transition periods for two areas of concern to them, namely the free acquisition of land, including farmland, and the freedom of establishment.

These are two very fundamental points and I should like to know what the Commission or your position is on this.

I also wanted to ask you what you think about linking transition periods in the Member States and the candidate countries in the sort of package deal that is constantly being discussed.

On the first question, I should like to say that the Member States still have no negotiating position on this question, nor is there any Commission draft on it.

My own personal opinion is irrelevant. In any case, I cannot explain it to the European Parliament until the institutions have formed their own opinion.

As far as linking transition periods is concerned, this happens automatically.

We shall have a so-called "play off" at the end of the negotiations between the wishes which the Member States still have and the wishes which the candidates have.

Basically their wishes concern transition periods.

Irrespective of whether or not that is what it is formally called, you can imagine how this sort of negotiation process proceeds.

It will be a negotiation and one of the principles of negotiation is that one side makes a concession so that the other side also makes a concession and an overall compromise must be found in the end which takes accounts of the wishes of both sides.

Highly specific packages - if that was your question - whereby we also say: we are linking the wish for transition periods on the one side to the wish for transition periods on the other side are not feasible in my opinion.

I should draw your attention to the fact that the question of transition periods in relation to the free movement of workers, for example, only gives cause for concern in two of the fifteen Member States.

It is a German problem and it is an Austrian problem.

It is not a problem for the other thirteen which is why I cannot predict exactly how this issue will be handled in the final stage of negotiations.

Thank you very much, Mr Commissioner, for your replies.

Questions Nos 41 and 42 will be replied to in writing.

Mr Titley has the floor for a point of order.

- Mr President, you realise this is the second month running you have done this to me - cut me off as my question was coming up.

Yet you have allowed speakers to speak for over one minute including a rather long and pointless dialogue about the merits of Murcia.

Also in the rules as I recall, you are only allowed to take one supplementary question per political group and these rules are being broken and as a consequence, for the second week running, I miss out on a question.

I think it is absolutely outrageous and I will be writing to the President to complain.

Mr Titley, I will reply briefly so as not to inconvenience the other MEPs.

I am not getting at you.

What has happened is that the 20 minutes devoted to Mr Verheugen have run out and it is now Mr Monti' s turn to reply, and he has been waiting some time.

With regard to the Rules of Procedure, I must tell you that there are two supplementary questions, not one.

Please read the Rules of Procedure.

I am not going to get into a debate.

You may write the letter you mentioned and you will receive a polite and full reply, but please do not worry since my intention was to give you the floor within the time allotted.

Subject: Applications by Member States regarding state aids Is the Commission happy about the speed with which it deals with applications by Member States to provide state aids?

The time-limits for the Commission to take a decision on aid projects notified by a Member State are laid down in Council Regulation 659/1999.

In most cases the Commission can close the examination of the notified aid project after the preliminary examination, that is without opening a formal investigation.

Such decisions must be taken within two months following the receipt of a complete notification.

In practice, notifications are frequently incomplete so that the Commission is forced to request additional information before it can take a decision.

In order to further reduce this type of unnecessary delay, the Commission has prepared detailed standard notification forms for certain types of aid - regional, training, R&D, etc. and will continue to do so where appropriate.

When doubts are raised about the compatibility of an aid project with the common market, the Commission must open a formal investigation for which the regulation provides an indicative time-limit of 18 months.

The Commission would certainly prefer to be able to reduce this time-limit.

However, this seems at present not feasible for different reasons.

Firstly, considerable time is needed for translation and publication of the decision, for third parties to submit observations and for the Member States to comment on these observations.

Secondly, the cases for which a formal investigation is opened are usually very complex and therefore require a longer period of examination, often also involving meetings with the Member State concerned and modifications to the original project.

Nevertheless, the Commission considers that given the absence of any time-limit for the formal investigation procedure before the regulation, the regulation has already brought some progress.

The Commission is also considering new ways of improving the efficiency and speed of state aid procedures.

In this regard, the group exemption regulations, which are currently being prepared for aid to SMEs - training aid and de minimis aid - should be mentioned.

Once they are in force, Member States will no longer need to notify aid projects complying with the conditions of the exemption regulations but can grant the aid immediately.

This will considerably simplify state aid procedures.

I wish to thank the Commissioner for that very full answer and, in particular, for the last part where he indicates that the Commission is looking at speeding up and, where possible, giving fast-track approval for state aids.

However, in some Member States there is still a serious problem created by delays in decision-taking on state aids.

I am convinced that some jobs have been lost because waiting for the decision on state aid has meant that a company has gone out of business in the end because it did not have the approval in time.

In terms of the delay, is the Commission of the opinion that the reorganisation that is currently going on will provide new resources and assistance to him in his attempts to speed up the processing of state aids, or does the problem lie, as he partly indicated, with the Member States in the inadequate information provided by some of them when they make an application?

As you know, Mr Martin, we are working in a number of directions concerning state aid and in order to make state aid control more stringent.

As to time limits, there are no plans to change the time limits in the near future.

The deadlines are laid down in a Council regulation, which for the first time codifies state aid procedures, and since that regulation was only adopted in 1999 it is not likely to be modified in the near future.

However, we are prepared and indeed willing to try to speed up certain aspects of the decision-making wherever possible, for example preparing the standard notification forms.

You mentioned the problem of resources.

Of course, this is a key problem for the whole of the competition policy activities and that includes state aid.

The better the quality of information provided to begin with by Member States in their notifications, the more likely it is that the process will be smooth and conducted in a relatively short time scale.

Subject: State aids to nuclear power Given that the electricity market came into effect in February last, subjecting all electricity production to the rules of the internal market, and that the nuclear common market under Article 92 of the Euratom Treaty does not include electricity as a product, does the Commission agree that electricity generated using nuclear energy is now subject to the same internal market rules as all other forms of electricity?

Does the Commission therefore consider that all state aids to the nuclear industry are prohibited by the EC Treaty, given that no derogation is specified, and that Article 98 of the Euratom Treaty does not provide for a subsidised accident insurance scheme for nuclear risks?

In this context what proposals, if any, has the Commission made to the UK Government concerning their NFFO system under Article 87 of the EC Treaty?

Can the Commission now confirm that it is investigating state aids to the nuclear industry as requested by the Green/EFA Group in its letter to Commissioner Monti of 10 March?

Mr President, the Commission shares the opinion of the honourable Member to the effect that the liberalisation of the electricity market affects all types of electricity, including electricity generated using nuclear energy.

The Commission considers that there are no grounds for interpreting the EC or the Euratom Treaty as necessarily prohibiting all state aids to the nuclear industry.

The Euratom Treaty does not include any clauses specifically prohibiting state aid.

Moreover, while Articles 87 and 88 of the EC Treaty do provide for a general principle prohibiting state aids, they also authorise specific categories of state aid.

It would only be possible to determine the incompatibility of aid following specific investigation of each case.

The Commission has not made any proposals to the UK Government on the subject of the NFFO system in application of Article 88 of the EC Treaty.

As regards any existing aid to the nuclear industry, the Commission is not undertaking any systematic investigation.

If, however, cases of incompatible aid are brought to the attention of the Commission, such cases will be dealt with in compliance with the terms of the relevant articles of the EC and Euratom Treaties.

Commissioner, thank you for your response, but I must admit I find it hard to grasp the logic of it.

On the one hand, regarding state aid to the environment, you expect to implement a very thorough analysis of the subsidies to renewable energies even though it is clear that, for the time being, this sector is at a disadvantage due to the internalisation of costs.

In other words, the market share of renewable energies within the current electricity market is barely 5%.

Alongside that, nuclear energy amounts to 30% of the market but in this case you do not plan any systematic investigation.

I do not therefore see how we can possibly understand this, if the logic of your energy policy is supposed to be fair, treating all forms of electricity production alike.

I must therefore ask you to justify your position since, as far as I am concerned, and also many others, most especially the renewable energy industry, it is a position which is extremely difficult to comprehend.

Subject: Financial aid given to the European nuclear industry What assessment has been made by the Commission of the financial aid given to the European nuclear industry - in the form of support for Euratom and the Joint Research Centres - in respect of competition policy on electricity production in the European Union?

Community action within the context of the Euratom Treaty complies with the provisions of the Treaty and relates, in particular, to the financing of the Commission's tasks: protection against radiation, monitoring safety and research.

As far as the latter is concerned, Community programmes for nuclear research are established by the Council which, pursuant to Article 7 of the Euratom Treaty, acts unanimously on Commission proposals.

In this context, the activities of the JRCs are intended, in conformance with its mission, to increase protection and nuclear safety, and in particular, provide scientific and technical assistance to the competent directorates-general.

Article 305 (ex Article 232) of the EC Treaty establishes that the provisions of this Treaty do not derogate from the Euratom Treaty.

This is particularly true in the case of the competition rules, which do not derogate from the framework established by the Euratom Treaty regarding Community nuclear research.

Therefore, the Community research policy under the Euratom Treaty does not contradict the competition rules laid down by the EC Treaty.

Commissioner, you have failed to answer my question.

I want to know what assessments you are making on financial aid.

This relates to the previous question by Mr Turmes as well and the answer you gave to that in respect of competition policy on electricity production in the EU.

I conclude from your answers both to my question and the previous one that here we have not just a white elephant in the nuclear industry in Europe but a holy cow.

You can provide state aids that are untouchable, even by a Commissioner as powerful as yourself!

But let me ask you what exactly is the situation?

You said that under the Treaties there are derogations - and you quoted the Euratom Treaty.

There is clearly a distortion between Member States because of the state aids.

Where exactly in the Treaty are the written permissions for these state aids?

Could you elaborate on that please?

First of all, if you allow me, I have here a note in French.

I should like to emphasise that the Commission does not rule out applying the rules of Community law on competition to public interventions in favour of nuclear electricity producers.

In its illustrative nuclear programme according to Article 40 of the Euratom Treaty, in particular, the Commission very clearly indicated that "Developments towards the liberalisation of the Community internal electricity market will mean that nuclear energy will have to compete in the same framework and under the same conditions as all other energy sources."

A full implementation of the internal market and a rigorous application of the relevant state aid and competition rules implies a level playing field for all energy sources.

Once this principle has been established, it is up to the Commission to investigate on an individual basis any allegations according to which the nuclear sector is in receipt of subsidies engendering unfair competition.

I may add that the services I am directly responsible for within the Commission are of the opinion that it is necessary to keep to a strict interpretation of the Treaty.

Competition rules are applicable to all electricity producers, including the nuclear sector, insofar as they do not depart from the terms of the Euratom Treaty.

I consider this position to be all the more justifiable since the directive liberalising the internal electricity market does not stipulate any specific rule for nuclear producers and does not make any distinctions on the grounds of the source of the electricity produced.

Commissioner, you say that neither the Treaty nor the directive on the internal electricity market stipulate any exemptions regarding subsidies to the nuclear sector.

On what part of the Treaty, then, is the exemption that you are still allowing the nuclear industry based?

Articles 87 and 88 make no reference to nuclear energy.

So it is not very clear what your legal basis is for exemptions for electricity generated using nuclear energy.

I believe I have given you all the information available to the Commission on the subject.

I can add that, on the operational level, as indeed I think I said in response to your own question, Mr Turmes, on existing aid to the nuclear industry, the Commission is not undertaking a comprehensive investigation.

If, however, cases of incompatible aid are brought to our attention, then these cases will be dealt with in accordance with the terms of the two treaties.

I would further like to add that in the logical overall construction of the EC Treaty, the articles governing state aid, i.e. Articles 87 and 88, are not restricted to specific sectors.

Since the time allotted to Questions to the Commission has elapsed, Questions Nos 46 to 83 will be replied to in writing.

That concludes Questions to the Commission.

(The sitting was suspended at 7.25 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m.)

Carbon dioxide emissions from new cars

The next item is the report (A5-0128/2000) by Mr González Alvarez, on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council decision establishing a scheme to monitor the average specific emissions of CO2 from new passenger cars.

Mr President, there are few of us here at this time in the evening, but it is also true that this is the third time we have debated this report in the European Parliament.

On the first occasion, in December 1998, this report on the reduction of carbon dioxide emissions from new passenger cars was approved at first reading with 48 amendments.

Of those 48 amendments, the Council and Commission accepted some in their entirety and others only in part.

The report therefore returned for a second reading.

The Council had accepted certain amendments which we considered to be important, but there remained certain aspects of the report and the amendments approved unanimously in the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy - and by a large majority in plenary session - which we also considered to be important and which had not been accepted.

We are basically talking about the inclusion, in this scheme to reduce carbon dioxide emissions from new cars, of lightweight industrial cars, which are used widely within cities and whose carbon dioxide emissions also pollute.

It also seemed to us that they had not included a guarantee of the quality of data.

For a scheme of this nature, rigour and comparability, in terms of the data collected by the governments, are essential.

It also seemed very important that we maintained something that was traditional in the positions of the Committee on the Environment: a certain degree of precaution in relation to voluntary agreements.

If we bear in mind that Community Law - directives and regulations - is often not complied with, it seems to us all the more unlikely that voluntary agreements will be complied with.

The Committee on the Environment had little faith in these voluntary agreements and another amendment asked for the establishment of a clear legal framework which would come into play in the event that the voluntary agreements failed.

They also finally accepted our concern that one of the paragraphs should not only mention the stabilisation of emissions, but also their reduction.

Another amendment which we felt was important concerned the dimensions of vehicles.

Mr President, in total, 10 amendments were approved by a substantial majority in this House and then not accepted by the Council, and we therefore had to embark on this conciliation procedure, which I must point out has been neither difficult nor controversial.

As its very name indicates, the conciliation procedures require each of the parties to give some ground so that a final agreement can be reached.

In this final agreement, our main concerns have been addressed.

It includes a study of the future inclusion of lightweight industrial vehicles, the possibility of shortly presenting a proposed legal framework and reviewing the data with a view to making them more rigorous and more or less equivalent in each of the countries.

In short, Parliament' s main concerns have been taken up, if not in an immediate and radical manner, at least to the extent that a commitment has been given to adopt decisions on this issue in the future.

The only amendment which was not accepted was the one relating to dimensions of vehicles.

Parliament continued to insist that this was very important because the more powerful and larger the vehicle, the greater its level of emissions, and we considered it important that this be included in one of the annexes.

However, bearing in mind that another six issues relating to the capacities and conditions of the vehicles have been accepted, we felt that we could not prolong the conciliation process any longer, particularly considering that we want this study on the reduction of carbon dioxide emissions from new passenger cars to be implemented immediately in each of the countries.

Finally, I believe that this is a reasonable agreement, which is neither Parliament' s nor the Council' s initial proposal.

Mr President, I believe that we will have no problem ensuring that this agreement is approved.

Mrs González Álvarez, conciliation processes vary in difficulty, I can assure you.

I am glad that this one has gone smoothly.

Mr President, Commissioner, allow me to start by congratulating Mrs González Álvarez.

She really is most persistent, because we had a very good report at second reading as it was, but she was determined to incorporate more proposed amendments and I really must congratulate her on succeeding in doing so.

Parliament has asserted itself against the Council once again.

The introduction of this sort of monitoring scheme is just one of the many steps on the path towards compliance with the Kyoto protocol.

Reducing greenhouse gases by 8% in comparison with 1990 is therefore the main objective between now and the year 2012.

The dramatic change in the climate has been noticeable here in Strasbourg over the past two days and is far greater than we assumed.

It will therefore come as no surprise if we adopt this report unanimously tomorrow, as will certainly be the case, and that the Council and Parliament have been able to find a common position so quickly.

This joint monitoring scheme is the first of its kind and I think that its success or failure will decide whether or not we opt to introduce other similar schemes.

We have taken recourse to a three-part strategy in order to reduce CO2 emissions and fuel consumption: environmental agreements with the car industry, a system of tax incentives and a system of labelling for fuel consumption and CO2 emissions.

But despite all these efforts, directives and joint measuring schemes, we should not delude ourselves: we are unlikely to achieve the target objective of reducing greenhouse gases to 1990 levels.

Some experts are advising us to try and stabilise emissions at present levels.

That may well be pessimistic but if we consider that the number of cars on the road is continuing to rise in the 14 Member States, oh excuse me, I meant 15; we Austrians often have to stop and ask ourselves if there are 14 or 15 Member States, but there are in fact still 15, and if we consider enlargement to the east and if we consider that people in China and India also want to live as we do, then we should make no mistake: it will be difficult to achieve a reduction in greenhouse gases or CO2 and we should therefore make every effort to stabilise them at the very least.

Despite all the pessimism, introducing a pan-European monitoring system for CO2 emissions will not do any harm.

Let us try yet again with one small step at a time and perhaps the House will sit in 2005, when we need to examine the initial results, and complain that perhaps we did not do enough today.

Mr President, Commissioner, trust is good, control is even better, as the Head of State of a now defunct system used to say.

Nonetheless, once in a while these words of wisdom fit the bill because our CO2 strategy for cars is of course a new departure in that we are trusting in the willingness of car manufacturers in Europe, Korea and Japan to take voluntary technical measures to reduce CO2 emissions from their cars to 140g by 2008, which will represent a reduction of around 25%.

But we do still need a control mechanism so that we can intervene if necessary.

Hence: trust is good, control is even better.

We want a statistically perfect control instrument at our disposal and in this respect I thank the rapporteur for her persistence in establishing a reasonable control instrument for CO2 emissions from cars in Europe which applies to all Member States, which clearly shows which vehicles are registered where and what their CO2 emissions are, so that we can see clearly in 2003 if the manufacturers' undertakings are being respected or not.

And if they are not, then we must take legislative measures.

I should like to refer to another two pillars in our strategy: the question of labelling, which has been dealt with and the question of additional tax incentives for low-consumption vehicles, which is still a somewhat weak point.

I think that all of us, especially of course the Member States, need to give clear additional incentives, so that we really can achieve our objective of 120 g in 2005.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I should like to congratulate our rapporteur on the excellent results that she has achieved and to begin by placing this report in the broader context of climate change.

Since the Rio de Janeiro Conference and then Kyoto, the European Union has always led the political side of the debate on climate change.

Nevertheless, although Europe continues to lead the debate in terms of rhetoric, it is beginning to lose the legitimacy to do so in a credible way.

It is rather pointless for the European Union to try to alarm the whole world with this problem when, in reality, the European greenhouse gas bubble, in particular the carbon dioxide bubble, is more likely to increase by 6% to 8% than to decrease by the 8% that we agreed in Kyoto.

It is therefore time to take internal action in order to lend credibility to our external efforts.

In terms of political action, the transport sector must be our priority for the following two fundamental reasons.

Firstly, because, according to the Green Paper published by the European Commission, this sector will not be part of the European trading system for carbon dioxide emissions, and all greenhouse gas reductions will therefore have to be achieved exclusively through national and Community policies and measures.

Secondly, because transport is the sector that is contributing most to Europe' s falling short of the levels set in Kyoto.

According to a study recently published by the European Environment Agency, transport is responsible for almost 30% of the European Union' s total emissions, and it predicts that the level of carbon dioxide emissions generated by this sector will increase by 39% of the 1990 level by 2010.

Given this extremely disturbing picture, which shows that road transport is responsible for 85% of total carbon dioxide emissions in the transport sector, and given the overwhelming need for action, the agreement reached in the Conciliation Committee on this system for monitoring CO2 emissions from light passenger vehicles is to be welcomed.

This system is a crucial aspect in the implementation of the Kyoto protocol and will ensure rigorous control of the voluntary commitment made by the car industry to reduce carbon dioxide emissions in new passenger vehicles by 25%.

I regret the fact that it has not been possible to include light commercial vehicles in this system.

In any event, I congratulate Mrs González Álvarez once again on the results she has achieved.

Mr President, Commissioner, I intend to be as brief as our successful rapporteur in the conciliation procedure.

However, let me just offer her my hearty congratulations on her excellent report and brilliant success, as some of the previous speakers have done.

Contrary to some previous speakers, I think it is most important that the report should seek not just to stabilise concentrations of greenhouse gases but to reduce them, especially given the fact that we need to achieve a demonstrable success by 2005 under the terms of the Kyoto protocol.

I think it is fundamental, given the reservation which this Parliament has always expressed in connection with voluntary obligations in environmental agreements, that we have managed to include the passage stating that data will be used from 2003 onwards to monitor the voluntary obligations of the car industry.

I also think that it is fundamental - and the scope is not extended by this decision - that we have managed to bring the Commission so far down the line that it is looking into implementing harmonised measurements for the specific CO2 emissions from class N1 vehicles and presenting proposals to this effect.

I think that is a huge success.

I should like once again to congratulate the rapporteur and vote in favour of this report.

Mr President, I welcome the excellent result reached by the European Parliament and the Council on this dossier.

I congratulate the co-legislators on their efforts in finding a swift and satisfactory agreement.

The process leading to the approval of this proposal constitutes a prime example of how the two arms of the European legislature can settle their differences and work together towards adoption of sound and effective environmental law.

I should like to seize the opportunity to thank the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Protection and, in particular, the rapporteur, Mrs González Álvarez, for its constructive approach.

The adoption of this decision will allow the effectiveness of the Community strategy to reduce CO2 emissions from passenger cars to be monitored and, more specifically, it will provide credible data to monitor the implementation of the voluntary agreements with car manufacturers.

This strategy is one of the most concrete activities of the Community on CO2 emissions and reductions from the transport sector.

Therefore it represents an important milestone in the achievement of the Kyoto target.

Mr President, unforgivably, I have forgotten something.

It will take me just 20 seconds to express my gratitude to all the members of the Conciliation Committee: to Mr Provan, to Mrs Jackson, who also participated, and to the members of the Commission and the Council with whom we worked in order to reach an agreement on the report.

Furthermore, I would like to thank all the MEPs for their support.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.

Interoperability of the trans-European rail systems

The next item is the joint debate on the following reports, tabled by Mr Savary on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism:

(A5-0112/2000) on the report from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament on the implementation and effects of Directive 96/48/EC concerning the interoperability of the trans-European high-speed rail system;

(A5-0113/2000) on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive on the interoperability of the trans-European conventional rail system.

Mr President, I hope that the two members due to speak before me were not travelling by train and have been delayed.

I think they are in the House and will arrive in time.

Unfortunately, the fact of the matter is that we are fighting numerous problems on the railways which are a legacy from the past.

For example, in 1970, the railways' share of the freight traffic market was 21%, compared with just 8.5% now.

The railways have lost out massively in freight traffic and their share of the passenger traffic market has fallen from 10 to 6%.

The winner has been road freight traffic, which is increasing constantly and winning market shares: 16% per annum on the eastern borders of Austria, for example.

It is now 2.4 times higher than in 1990.

If you take lorries and buses from eastern Europe on the A1 motorway, which is the most important east-west route, traffic increased sixfold between 1995 and the year 2000.

In other words, freight traffic, especially transit freight traffic, is growing massively.

According to forecasts, it will rise by more than 100% between 1995 and 2015.

That is why it is important and urgent that we concern ourselves with the European rail network.

It totals 156 000 kilometres in length, of which 78 000 km are accounted for by the TEN network.

12 600 km of new lines for speeds of over 250 km/h should be constructed by 2010, with at least 16 300 km of lines due to be upgraded for speeds of over 200 km/h.

The total costs - and they are huge - are estimated at EUR 186 billion between now and 2010.

So it is obvious how important this investment is for the European Union and that is why we are being called on here to set the priorities quickly.

I think that it is high time we adapted the railways to the market economy, so as to ensure that the railways invest more money more often in customer requirements and that we can jointly set the priorities and draw up a tight, efficient timetable.

The main requirements are, of course, to harmonise the gauge throughout Europe, especially where more than two countries cooperate.

At the moment, we still have five different gauges.

We need uniform electrification, especially in relation to voltage and frequency.

In other words, the technical properties of the electricity must be brought into line so that extra electricity can be bought from the national grids and fed into the national grids without any significant losses.

The third, and I think the most important point is the safety of trains.

We really do need external inspection and certification agencies.

We cannot have a situation in which the agency operating the railway is also responsible for inspecting it.

No-one questions the fact that cars and lorries are inspected by external certification agencies.

I think there is an urgent need, given the recent train crashes, for external inspection agencies to look after the safety of passengers in Europe.

Mr President, first of all I should like to thank all the Members who supported the rapporteur in his work in presenting these two reports which are, I believe, absolutely crucial to the future of the railways.

The first report analyses the application of the 1996 Directive on the interoperability of the high-speed rail system, drawing the lessons of this for the future.

Next, and this is the substance of the second report, we must discuss and vote on a proposed directive on the interoperability of the trans-European conventional rail system.

Ladies and gentlemen, we must appreciate the full importance of this subject.

There is today an unacceptable contradiction between what is said in speeches and the reality of European transport systems. As might have been expected, the creation of the internal market has, logically, considerably developed the trade in goods and the mobility of persons within the Union, which have shown an increase of 21% and 15% respectively between 1990 and 1997.

The bulk of the traffic from this explosive growth in internal mobility, which is expected to be consolidated in the next few decades, has been acquired by road systems and, secondarily, maritime cabotage via the North Sea.

At a time when we have right here, in most of the countries of the Union, a rail network and technology unparalleled in the world, with a recent study evaluating the external costs of road transport in terms of public health, infrastructure and pollution at some EUR 480 billion, even though the objective of sustainable mobility and respect for quality of life are now shared by all Europeans, it can be noted that rail has only an 8.6% market share for freight, and 5.8% for passenger transport.

There is more than one explanation for this paradox: rail' s reduced level of competitiveness due to a social differential in relation to the road sector, but also the distortions of competition engendered by the considerable external costs of road transport, the priority which most major railway companies in recent years have given exclusively to prestigious high-speed passenger transport, but also excessive national characteristics in terms of railway traditions, techniques and protocols, thereby compromising the flow of continental rail traffic.

Today, the situation of the European transport network situation is simple to the point of caricature: there is only one common area in transport and that is the road network.

There is no longer any single airspace or European maritime area, nor especially a continuous railway area within the countries of the Union.

The issue at stake in railway interoperability is, of course, doing away with the technical frontiers that have been inherited from the national railway structures set in place gradually since the nineteenth century.

Today, the Europe of the Fifteen has no less than sixteen electric signalling systems, six electrical voltages, five track gauges and several equipment and therefore infrastructure gauges.

Of course, the new high-speed train infrastructures offer a prime area for the introduction of interoperability, since they are new or recent networks devoted to very similar technology.

Directive 96/48 was adopted for this purpose.

The report on its application, four years on, referred to Parliament to express an opinion, delivers contrasting results, but results that are in the end more positive than they may seem.

In the first place, significant delay is observed in the transposition of laws and regulations since, to date, only two countries have transposed it and the first technical specifications for interoperability are on the point of being completed and published.

The conclusion is therefore that the time limits for transposition and publication must be more stringent in future.

This delay in transposing into law has not, however, hindered the development of interoperable cross-border lines, although Thalys is the only example of true interoperability, more so than even Eurostar, despite its attempts to solve the gauge problem.

These two international lines have established a precedent which can serve as a model for future developments.

More than that, however, in anticipation of tangible results in future, the directive on the interoperability of high-speed routes has primarily made it possible to define and iron out working methods.

For the first time, the railway industry, rail companies and infrastructure managers have started up a joint project to define the technical specifications for interoperability.

They have worked on the basis of the most general studies by the International Union of Railways.

Within the European Association for Railway Interoperability (EARI) they have set up a working group which now has methods and experience available for transposition to conventional systems.

Finally, the Committee established by Article 21, bringing together representatives of the Member States and the Commission, enables political and technical monitoring of interoperability projects and intervention at the discretion of states to direct such projects.

In other words, while the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism felt bound to remind the Member States of their obligations in terms of time limits and transposition, it must be admitted that the high-speed systems have provided a first-rate testing ground for the vast worksite of interoperability.

In this respect, we have to bear in mind that the network and the conventional stock present problems for harmonisation that are formidable in other ways, due to the national and historical characteristics of networks, the great diversity of the stock, and the considerable extent of the networks.

It must be made quite clear at this point that there is no question of insisting that rail companies and infrastructure managers immediately proceed to replace their equipment comprehensively. This is totally out of reach, economically.

In the first place, if the goal is to achieve interoperability, this must entail using the fastest and least costly means to achieve decisive progress.

In this respect, interoperability may be achieved by methods other than the harmonisation of equipment, since it is possible to adapt equipment to operate in different configurations, following the example of the quadruple-system locomotives.

This is a proposal for a pragmatic and realistic approach which would not detract from railways' competitiveness in relation to other modes of transport by imposing additional costs.

The key principles of this proposed directive are as follows: restriction of the geographical area covered by conventional system interoperability to the trans-European network as defined by the 1996 European Parliament and Council Decision; a policy of gradual convergence rather than systematic renewal, taking the form of phasing in priorities and interoperability, establishing a hierarchy for subsystems to enable the fastest and cheapest access, with priority only to new investment for creating, extending, renewing, maintaining and operating systems; establishing a hierarchy of objectives, distinguishing across-the-board objectives to be included in all standards: safety, reliability, health, environmental protection and technical compatibility; the objectives inherent in each technical subsystem: infrastructure, energy, rolling stock, etc.; the separation of the technical task of framing the TSIs assigned to a joint representative body, from the standardisation work entrusted to the European standards institutes, and the inspection and certification entrusted to notified bodies; a policy of user consultation, as suggested by the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism which cannot be envisaged, ladies and gentlemen, without concomitant consultation of staff representatives, the subject of an amendment that we shall be discussing tomorrow; finally, ongoing monitoring of these projects by the Member States and the Commission through the Committee established under Article 21, implemented by the high-speed directive, enabling states to request exemptions, to include special cases in the technical specifications for purely historic or regional networks, as well as certain types of equipment originating from third countries, and also instruments for authorising commissioning operations notified by Member States to the Commission.

In other words, there are safety valves for countries with a high level of special characteristics, and, within the institutions stipulated by the directive, they still have the opportunity to argue the case for these special characteristics and to have them included in the studies and in the TSI publications.

Finally, during the transition period, it is important to prevent the networks from growing further apart.

To this end, new investments, between now and the publication of the TSIs, shall have to comply with authorised technical references.

A Union rolling-stock register will be set up, making it possible to identify the rolling stock, its renewal and ageing, in the same way that this is still carried out, albeit imperfectly, for the maritime fleet.

Furthermore, we have to look to the future and, therefore, both the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism and the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy have proposed involving candidate country representatives in the projects at this early stage, so that they can anticipate this future acquis communautaire.

Similarly, and this is a recommendation that we make, we should already be planning conditions of interoperability between the various modes of transport, in accordance with our general objective of developing intermodal interoperability.

It would, of course, be presumptuous to expect everything to be achieved by this directive and the long-term upgrading work it requires from railway operators.

Quite clearly Europe is proposing to undertake a long-term and very large-scale project throughout its vast railway network.

It cannot single-handedly solve the problem of distortions of competition or of network access or charges which would represent crucial progress towards a new golden age of rail in Europe.

All the same, the technical interoperability of our old national networks is indeed an essential condition for the recovery of rail, which this balanced, reasonable and flexible text should make possible to achieve in gradual phases under acceptable economic and social conditions.

To the many of you who contributed to this, let me reiterate my gratitude and my appreciation.

Mr President, Commissioner, honourable Members, I should like to start by thanking the rapporteur, Mr Savary, and all the members involved for their excellent and constructive cooperation on this difficult, purely technical subject.

The number of proposed amendments tabled, including here in plenary, shows how important this issue is for Europe, which is why I can also praise the Commission for addressing the subject of the interoperability of conventional trains as well as of high-speed trains.

I think it is a pity that few Member States have transposed the interoperability directive with regard to high-speed trains and I call on the Commission to exert pressure to prevent the loss of valuable time which is costing the railways in terms of market shares and competition.

The directive is even more important where conventional trains are concerned.

The aim of the directive - as with high-speed trains - is to harmonise technical provisions in order to ensure that conventional rail traffic within the Union runs as smoothly as possible and to give candidate countries really exact specifications so that through traffic is also guaranteed after enlargement.

Interoperability will also have many advantages for both passengers and freight transport.

Better services, greater comfort, less travelling time, increased safety and possibly also lower prices.

The harmonisation of technical standards is also needed for the long overdue liberalisation of the railways.

Both together, interoperability and liberalisation, are most important if the railways are to survive in the internal market.

I am delighted that we have succeeded with the rapporteur and numerous other members in finding a good, common line on most aspects of this very demanding subject and would like to thank them for that.

This applies above all to the initially highly disputed derogations from the TSIs, but also to the social dimension of this directive, where we were finally able to achieve a compromise.

Nonetheless, - and we in the group of the European People' s Party and European Democrats continue to believe that we are right here - generally-worded social aspects do not belong in this purely technical directive, even if the Commission and the Council may think otherwise.

We are likewise opposed to involving passengers in working out TSIs.

Including these aspects will only result in the directive being difficult or impossible to manage.

Finally, a few other proposed amendments have been tabled, which we consider are quite simply too bureaucratic and have no positive aspects to boot.

In short, our group is against any elements which are counterproductive when it comes to achieving the important objective of an efficient European railway, as outlined above.

Allow me in closing to highlight the excellent cooperation once again; I am optimistic that together we shall achieve the objective of creating as smooth a railway system as possible.

) Mr President, I would first like to congratulate Mr Savary on his drafting of such excellent reports.

This is an important topic, but also an extremely complicated one.

Mr Savary has taken good account of the views of others.

My group supports improvement of the competitiveness of railways and liberalisation of competition.

The first stage is to create the conditions for uninterrupted movement of trains over the entire region of the European Union.

Technical Specifications for Interoperability (TSIs) and common standards are a sine qua non for the development of railway interoperability.

The rapporteur has quite rightly adopted a gradual approach.

Technical solutions can vary a great deal.

The competitiveness of railways should not be undermined by the imposition of additional economic burdens, even though common standards will lower costs in the longer term.

Existing differences between national railway systems will make necessary some exceptions in the harmonisation of railway systems, so that no Member State shall have to face inordinate difficulties and so that current railway transport will not be jeopardised.

This report outlines a course of action by which these exceptions can be accepted without jeopardising the principal objective.

There is one further matter which would require fine tuning; this was outlined in Amendment No 35 by my Group.

It applies to Finland in particular, but some of the applicant countries will be faced with the same problem in connection with enlargement of the Union.

The matter referred to concerns Russian freight wagons, where technical solutions are applied which differ from those of the Member States, inter alia in the area of couplings and brakes.

They are not necessarily inferior, but different.

Russia is hardly about to change its standards in order to comply with the requirements of the Union.

For Finland, this is an exceptionally major issue.

Due to historical reasons, the track gauge in Finland and Russia is the same, but it is different from that in Europe in general.

Russian wagons account for approximately 40 % - almost a half - of Finnish freight transport.

The reason for this high percentage is that we do not want to take the risk of sending Finnish wagons to Russia, since experience shows that they are so very rarely returned.

Russia, of course, is a country which leans heavily on rail transport, with a rolling stock which must equal that of the entire region of the EU put together

In the review concerning point 5 of Article 5, Mr Savary proposes that when considering special cases, particular attention should be paid to the rolling stock of third countries.

This proposal is very good, but the solution remains half-finished, as far as Finland is concerned.

It will lead to unnecessary and laborious inspections of Russian wagons and to massive bureaucracy.

There is no certainty either that Russian wagons in all instances would be regarded as special cases.

This is why we have tabled an amendment of Article 7, which simply aims at making it possible to use third country freight wagons for traffic, as long as they do not cross the border between two Member States.

This is the addition referred to as point f in the Committee' s amendment.

Implementation of this proposal would give assurance that rail traffic in Finland could continue without becoming drastically reduced.

Mr President, Environment Commissioner, I am pleased that you are here because we can now address this matter straight away.

We are evidently debating a highly technical subject matter, namely the interoperability of both high-speed and conventional rail systems.

This gives me the opportunity to make a few comments on the environmental dimension to this proposal.

Today, we are essentially witnessing one of many historic moments which those who work in the sector, as well as those who are in favour of trains, have waited for for a long time, because at the end of the day, all this is, of course, meant to culminate in technological harmonisation, which entails the harmonisation of international rail, labour organisations, train drivers who have to make international rail journeys, etc. This also means that employers' organisations and trade unions will have an entirely different role and outlook with respect to this work.

In short, the proposal has a knock-on effect on many other areas and it will be some time before it is a reality. Certainly if I look at the high-speed link and its technical specifications, I share Mr Savary' s view - who has drawn up an excellent report - that it is scandalous that three, nearly four years after the previous directive on interoperability of the high-speed link, we are still waiting for technical specifications for interoperability.

This does not bode well at all for the future.

What we are aiming for in the long run with this rail proposal is to attempt to cut down on traffic jams but also, more importantly, to benefit the environment, safety and a number of other aspects.

It has to be said, and I have already mentioned this several times within other fora, that the rail system is gradually losing its environmental edge, not so much because it does not take any initiatives itself, but more so because we ourselves prescribe few, if any, specifications for example, regarding the use of diesel-electric locomotives, the type of electricity used, etc.

What we would like, and this is why we welcome with open arms the dual speed for technical specification requirements, is for this technical specification to at least take account of energy consumption and air pollution, something which will require a great deal of hard work.

The second important point is of course the social dimension, as I touched upon a moment ago.

I regret that we are confining ourselves to the bare minimum, i.e. working conditions.

We refer to a social dialogue but we should really take it one step further, because this affects the entire labour organisation of railways.

I would urge you to look into the positive experiences which certain countries have had in changing the labour organisation of the rail system, in order to bring about a more efficient rail system and to set up exchange programmes, so that we can learn from experiences in countries which have struggled in the past, and which are often still struggling where other elements of the rail dossier are concerned, such as liberalisation or fair pricing.

Mr President, despite European integration, the rail system is disintegrating.

It is increasingly hard to obtain international rail timetables and it is often the case that train tickets to remote destinations have to be bought outside the country of departure.

Not so long ago, it was possible to take a direct train from Cologne to Athens, from Paris to Lisbon or from Amsterdam to Copenhagen. This is now a thing of the past.

Meanwhile, railways are, however, in the process of being re-discovered.

The times when trains were seen as a burden inherited from the nineteenth century, something that can be neglected and dismantled, are fortunately over.

Almost everyone admits that trains should once again play a key role in European long-haul transport for people and goods alike. This is not just necessary to meet the increasing demand for transport options, but mainly to curb the tide of cars and aeroplanes which form a threat to the environment.

The views on how to modernise the rail system are strongly divided.

For a long time, it was fashionable to apply everything that had contributed to the emergence of cars and aeroplanes to trains. According to this line of thinking, everything should come down in price and should become flexible, so that price-based competition has a less detrimental effect on trains.

Some people still advocate that everything should be privatised and liberalised, that the influence of trade unions must be restrained and that railway personnel should perform more work for lower wages.

According to the Confederal Group of the European United Left/Nordic Green Left, these remedies are worse than the disease. These would reportedly lead to further decay of the railway business and deterioration in the quality of services, and would force personnel to strike more, for reasons of self-preservation.

The real solutions must be sought in a completely different direction.

For starters, there should be better cooperation between the existing national railway companies in the management of frequent and fast cross-border routes.

In the case of the conventional railway system, the routes Brussels to Amsterdam, Hamburg to Copenhagen and Dublin to Belfast are good examples of this.

The passengers are unaware that it is two companies who are responsible for this one joint and frequent link.

This could also apply to the extensions of the French high-speed links in England, Belgium, the Netherlands and Germany which are running under the names "Eurostar" and "Thalys".

To guarantee success, it is important not to bring in a whole ream of new commercial businesses, which would lead to bad connections and variable pricing.

Furthermore, the money to finance such a high-speed network should not be found through cutting down services on short-haul routes in the individual Member States, as many people are indignant - and rightly so - about the huge amount of funding being ploughed into fast connections for the benefit of a small, privileged minority.

The construction of new high-speed links will continue to meet with protest if the ordinary domestic train user only ever experiences higher prices and fewer facilities and if they do not solve the environmental problems caused by cars and aeroplanes.

Needless to say, technology should be better harmonised by means of common mains voltage, joint equipment, fewer changes for passengers at borders and uniform safety requirements.

Privatisation and fragmentation according to the British model offer no guarantee whatsoever that those improvements could be better accommodated than if we were to keep the present state enterprises.

The position of the one million employees in the European rail system must be protected.

They are people who offer useful services to each and every one of us. This is why they should not come at the bottom of the list in our railway policy, as is sometimes advocated, I regret to say, by those in favour of a commercial approach.

My group would like to see trade-union rights, participation, working conditions and work pressure given a more prominent role.

Luckily, the rapporteur is not yielding under the pressure to consider personnel as a cost factor alone.

I am pleased that Mr Savary' s proposals help strike a happy balance.

Mr President, Mr Savary' s reports raise a matter of crucial importance to European railways.

Given the alarming position rail finds itself in in most Member States, intervention is vital.

It is of utmost importance to drastically reduce the obstacles created for international traffic by inconsistencies in the different types of equipment and networks used.

The harmonisation of the physical networks for the conventional rail system is a step in the right direction and certainly deserves support. Nobody can deny its importance.

Despite this, I am of the opinion that a great deal of the work done by Members is superfluous. Most of their wishes have already been incorporated in some shape or form in the text of the directive.

This should not be done again. Furthermore, we are dealing with a directive here, which means that it makes little sense to include too detailed and intricate specific cases.

This directive is extremely technical in nature and its main objective is to facilitate the use of all kinds of trains using all kinds of networks.

This is why comments concerning personnel do not really seem to fit in here. Only clear agreements on qualifications for personnel who will be deployed on cross-border routes are necessary.

The curbing of the freedom of enterprise should not go further than strictly necessary.

In short, Mr President, I will certainly support the idea contained in the reports, even if certain proposed elements are not appropriate in this context.

A very good evening Mr President, Commissioner. It is unusual, but you know that I have the highest personal regard for you and am therefore delighted to see you here this evening.

Interoperability is a fundamental issue and, if we take it seriously, the time has come to admit that the European Union has failed over recent years.

We have made no progress whatsoever with interoperability.

I think it is extremely important that we again inform the Council, where everything is diligently recorded, that 40 years after the creation of the European common market, we have made no progress in the railway sector.

I hope that the draft report by Mr Savary, whom I should like once again to thank for his draft, and I should also like to thank my colleague Mrs Jeggle for her shadow report - I hope that if we manage to persuade the Commission and Council to accept the draft report, we shall be reasonably well placed for the future.

I also hope that the Council will accept our proposed amendments.

We have taken a great deal of trouble and Mr Savary has also tabled umpteen proposed amendments for the plenary sitting, which we support, in order to achieve a report which the Council can accept, thereby avoiding a conciliation procedure and second reading.

I hope that the Council will do so and I call on it to act responsibly.

Having made no progress whatsoever with interoperability for years now, the Council should accept our decision tomorrow so that we can make some progress and avoid yet another second reading and conciliation procedure.

The difficulty which must be acknowledged is, of course, that the internal market can only function if we have uniform systems in the long term and we must ensure that we really do make progress here.

I also call on industry in Europe to abandon the policy it has pursued over recent years of separating off its national market by deliberately not manufacturing rolling stock which can be used in other countries.

Everyone has staked out their own market, which is why we have this fragmented railway market in Europe - and this is unacceptable.

Allow me one more closing comment. Mr Swoboda, who is about to speak, and I shall soon be discussing the Railway Pact here in the House.

We are opening the markets but we need interoperability in order to do so.

These are two aspects of the overall complex and I therefore hope that the Council really is wise and clever enough to accept the proposed amendments which we shall probably adopt by a large majority tomorrow.

Mr President, Commissioner, honourable Members, we are, in fact, in a situation in which we are building up a European railway system, albeit somewhat late.

Mr Jarzembowski and I hold such similar views that I should like to begin where he left off.

In a few weeks' time, we shall propose to Parliament at second reading and by a large majority - there are still a few differences of opinion here and there - what framework market conditions and operating regulations are needed in order to create a European railway system.

All this, as the previous speaker has already said, will not produce a European railway system unless there is also a degree of interoperability on the technical and social side.

It is grotesque: every private company, even small private companies, think European nowadays.

It is only on the railways that we have not managed to achieve this and we are now endeavouring to bring about a European attitude.

The comment about industry is correct.

We always look spellbound at America, at the United States, where industry and, of course, the free market economy are also promoted by the state.

Except that, when it comes to American companies, the situation is quite different.

In Europe, uniting in a common European market is proving to be an arduous task.

How can we expect European products to be used throughout the world, when we are cannot even agree on certain technical conditions and interoperability in Europe?

In this sense I should like to offer the rapporteur, Mr Savary, my full and unequivocal support and congratulate him on his excellent report.

What we need is technical interoperability.

Industry has its part to play here, but of course clients, i.e. the European construction companies, must also do what they can to force industry to cooperate.

This also applies, and here I disagree with a number of previous speakers, to social comparability and alignment.

Of course, that does not mean that everything will become identical, because we do not want a situation with one side more or less exploiting the other; we want a situation in which we look together to see how we can bring about a European railway system.

Safety is also, without doubt, an issue.

The huge advantage of the railway is that it is safe and environmentally-friendly.

Just as it is a pity that the transport Commissioner cannot be here, it is a good sign that the Commissioner for the environment is here, because, in the final analysis, traffic, and railway traffic in particular, is a means to an end and not an end in itself and it should help to improve our environmental situation.

Mr Savary has also highlighted a very important point; namely that we must ensure during the enlargement of the European Union that the European railway system does not stop at the current borders of the European Union but covers the whole of Europe so that it can help to improve the environment and increase traffic safety throughout Europe.

Mr President, Commissioner, honourable Members present in the House, Mr Savary' s report is an excellent piece of work and he deserves both thanks and recognition.

I should like to focus in my speech on three aspects and I am sorry that Mrs Jeggle and Mr van Dam take the opposite view on two of these aspects.

First, liberalisation of the railway networks in the Member States and the establishment of a common market for railway services is addressed from the point of view of free access and transit rights for the infrastructures of the Member States in cross-border traffic, especially freight traffic.

And new technical specifications for interoperability are at the forefront here.

In my view, the proposed extension to the concept of interoperability, by including questions such as the professional qualifications of staff and the need for health and safety regulations at the workplace, is of paramount importance and a vote in favour of the report by my group depends on it.

Most national railway systems in the Member States have comprehensive rules governing the aforementioned social aspects and rather than lose them in the process of liberalisation at European level, we must harmonise them at the highest possible level.

At this point I should like to support the call for more authority to be given to the merely advisory voice of the social partners in the sectoral committee and for the European social partners to be granted equal decision-making powers similar to those in many national regulations, when resolutions are passed.

Secondly, in addition to agreeing to the minimum level of technical harmonisation proposed in the report, the preparation of ex ante cost-benefit analyses and the order of priorities for drawing up TSIs, my group sets particular store by including the social partners, associations and organisations, passengers and users in the work of drafting and checking technical specifications for interoperability.

Thirdly, we also support the proposal to allow representatives from the candidate countries of Central and Eastern Europe to attend committee meetings from the outset.

The plan to involve them in the process of discussing and setting TSIs from the outset is important if the technical standards and specifications of future candidate countries to are to be brought into line early on with current developments in the EU.

This will allow us to ensure ahead of time that the infrastructure in these countries can keep pace, thereby helping to minimise the separate costs which the European Union would otherwise incur.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, the Savary report follows the rationale of sustainable development.

As we consider interoperability to be essential, we support this report, and offer our congratulations to Mr Savary for the pertinence of his observations.

The road-rail balance must be adjusted by means of a carefully calculated interoperability.

In the long term, the increase in heavy goods transport will cause enormous problems, such as congestion, the construction of new routes, and problems of safety and pollution.

It is absolutely essential, in this eventuality, to have recourse to rail transport.

The problem is even greater for countries located at strategic crossroads, such as France, where the saturation of the road networks is yet another argument for the crucial need to put interoperability into practice.

The models of Thalys and Eurostar must be extended and intensified with the new high-speed train routes: TGV-East to Germany, Southern Europe-Atlantic to Madrid and Lisbon, and South-Mediterranean to Barcelona.

As for conventional rail networks, it is time that interoperability was made compulsory, reinforced by considerable amounts of European aid which would, moreover, enable Member States to safeguard their conventional local networks.

Interoperability is all the more necessary as rail transport is profitable over long distances.

So border stops, changes in equipment and staff and, more importantly, transhipment operations should be limited to avoid putting a strain on reliability in terms of the time and service provided.

Airfreight manages perfectly well without border stops.

We shall not be able to upgrade the competitiveness of rail unless we bring in stringent constraints.

Interoperability must be made compulsory, particularly for the new networks that are being built, even if the TSIs have not been finalised.

We cannot afford to delay any longer before actually implementing this measure which will acquire even greater significance with the enlargement of our Community.

Mr President, Commissioner, a great deal has been said in today' s discussion.

In my view, the most important points to be borne in mind are two figures, which are really quite shocking.

The first is that in 1970, the railways had a 20% share of the freight market, whereas today they have just 8.5%.

The second figure concerns the average hourly speed of railways in Europe, which is 16 kilometres per hour.

And all this in the year 2000!

Evidently, we need an immediate political response from the 15 Member States of the European Union.

Before such a response can be given, we first need to understand the problem and we need the corresponding political will.

In my view, and of course this is the view of all those who have spoken today, we need to take steps as regards network compatibility and interoperability, because we have different technical specifications, different standards and different management systems.

And of course, we all endorse the report by Mr Savary, whom I would once again like to commend on his work.

However, it is not enough for us just to forge ahead with interoperability.

We need to consider the entire railway liberalisation package and combine this with interoperability. In this context, I would like to say that the Helsinki Council resolutions may well be satisfactory, but they are inadequate.

If we want to make headway, then we need to adopt the opinion expressed by the European Parliament at first reading, because it deals more fully with the problem which, as is already quite clear I think, is a particularly acute problem.

We should all realise that a common market without a unified transport network is simply will-o' -the wisp.

So if we want to examine the problem in its entirety, we need to have, and to provide, the necessary responses.

I would like to add two separate issues concerning my country, Greece, since my capacity as chairman of the Transport Committee does not, I imagine, deny me the right to raise problems of this kind.

The first problem is that Greece has no main cross-border rail links, especially with other Member States.

On the contrary, it has important cross-border rail links with third, non-EU countries, which are not bound by Community legislation and, consequently, employ their own national standards and systems and will no doubt continue to do so in the shorter or longer term.

This is certainly an issue which merits special mention and regulation so that the European harmonisation we are working for does not prove to be detrimental to the cross-border rail networks of countries such as Greece.

Another issue I would like to touch upon is that special provision should be made for peculiarities and differences caused by the geographical location and topography of various Member States such as Greece, the United Kingdom, Denmark, Finland, etc., whose remote or island nature causes particular problems.

Mr President, I too regret the absence of the Commissioner here this evening.

Perhaps she is stuck at Brussels airport.

Perhaps she should have taken the train.

I begin by welcoming the Commission's proposal to integrate Europe's convention on a high-speed rail network.

I thank the rapporteur for his patience, his skill and, above all, his commitment to the cause of Europe's railways.

I would also like to thank the Portuguese presidency for its skilful handling of this very complex dossier - an example of Europeans working together to solve common problems.

This problem, I believe, can only be solved satisfactorily at EU-level.

As we have heard already this evening, in 1970 the railways had a 21% share of the freight market, today just 8.5%.

In 1970 the railways had a 10% share of the passenger market, today just 6%.

If these trends continue just 4% of travellers will go by train at the end of the decade and rail freight will all but disappear.

The sad fact is that the railways have lost ground even where there are well placed, for example, in long distance freight.

The very future of our railways is at stake, together with the jobs of one million people employed in the industry.

A key reason for this decline is that, in contrast to aviation and road haulage, a single market does not exist in this sector.

For 150 years, the railways have been organised along national lines.

Even the opportunity of electrification further divided Europe's railways because there are now five different systems in operation.

More recently the railways have adopted 16 different and incompatible electronic signalling systems. That all adds costs and it means railways cannot compete.

Differences have also contributed to the fragmentation of the market for railway equipment.

This proposal being considered here tonight, together with other proposals from the Commission, aims to create an internal market in rail services.

It will help achieve a harmonisation of technical standards for equipment and rolling stock and the integration of national networks to boost cross-border traffic.

That will make the railways more efficient, reliable and more competitive.

It would also boost the railway equipment industry in countries such as my own.

It will contribute to the fulfilment of our aim of switching freight from the congested and polluted roads to Europe's railways and encouraging the development of more high-speed rail services to take the place of short-haul flights.

The revitalisation of the railways is crucial to the future of Europe's transport system, our environment and our economy.

That is why Mr Savary's report deserves our full support.

Mr President, Commissioner, like aviation, the present issue is reminiscent of air traffic control.

It is high time that the Member States forsook their national stances in favour of a European stance because it is national stances that have prevented the rail system from being vital and from retaining its passengers and freight.

Instead, we are now faced with the opposite.

Mr Savary' s excellent report is the first in a whole series of reports which will deal with the rail system and its liberalisation, which is essential, in my view.

Trains should not be confined to internal borders within a large European market.

Liberalisation and competition should be introduced within this large European market.

That, in my view, is the best solution for customers and services. If the best solution had been cooperation between national companies, then they would have done this a long time ago and we would not be faced with this long-standing problem, namely that rail transport is on the wane.

For a country like mine, and several other Members have spoken about their own countries, it is, of course, essential that we have one European market with technical unity or 'interoperability' , to use a buzz word. Indeed, a small country is vulnerable in that respect, but a country which lies at major intersections is even more vulnerable to this.

I think that we need to take sound steps and take them fast.

A difficult issue was that of personnel.

Mr Savary, I welcome the compromise that we were able to reach in that respect.

It is, of course, important for health and safety to be regulated and not compromised over, and this is also true, of course, of training. We should be very clear about this too, so as to ensure that these issues are brought into line.

I am left with one question, namely I wonder whether we are sufficiently ambitious, as indeed, we are only referring to trans-European rail systems.

In my opinion, however, if we harmonise trans-European rail systems, we should also do the same for national rail systems.

This is especially important for those people who manufacture trains and train equipment.

We need, as a matter of urgency, to create a European single market in that respect too, and this will only be possible if we harmonise trans-European, i.e. international, as well as national traffic.

As such, we need to ensure as soon as we can that we create rail systems modelled on the HST, such as Thalys and Eurostar, which do not stop at borders but which carry on. This should also be possible for ordinary trains because if not, Mr President, we are heading for a traffic nightmare.

Indeed, if we do not breathe new life into the railway sector, we will always have that traffic nightmare hanging over us and it is absolutely essential that we resolve this matter.

Mr President, Commissioner, I would like to begin, as some previous speakers have done, by thanking Mr Savary - the author of these two reports - for his work on achieving harmonisation, which has been difficult, but which has looked to the future. His task has certainly been difficult, and this has been demonstrated by the conflicting interests expressed during tonight' s speeches.

As a Spanish MEP, I would have preferred the task to have been achieved with greater flexibility and certain technical specifications which affect structural issues within the railway system not to have been applied.

I am referring specifically to the Spanish rail gauge, which, since this is a problem affecting the basic railway structure, we believe would involve a costly and slow renovation, and its particular circumstances need to be taken into account.

This means that it should not be regulated by means of the so-called 'specific cases' , subject to committee decisions, but that, on the contrary, we should consider the possibility that automatic derogations should apply depending on the incompatibility of these technical specifications with existing lines.

We therefore hope that you will be receptive to this request because, otherwise, we should bear in mind that all the projects, all the development plans for the rail networks affected by these specifications, would be subject to difficult conditions, and this would have a negative effect, since it would create uncertainty in relation to the planned investment programmes themselves.

Mr President, Commissioner, I recently visited the newly constructed Öresund Bridge which links Sweden and Denmark and which is, of course, a part of the European transport network.

It means that a fixed link is being created between Scandinavia and the continent.

The bridge will make it considerably easier to convey people and goods from Sweden and Finland to the rest of Europe.

However, we have a problem, at present, with different voltage systems.

In fact, the power has to be taken away from a portion of the track so that the trains are able to alternate between the different voltage systems in Sweden and Denmark.

We have different gauges in Sweden and Finland.

The only railway linking the two countries is that between Haparanda and Torneå.

Gauge switches are now being tested there to make it easier to cross the border.

However, there are also some extremely good examples of other systems.

The ore trains which travel from northern Sweden to northern Norway have just the one driver to take the train across the border.

This works well because the countries concerned have cooperated with the employers and employees.

Within the EU, we now have fifteen different and separate railway systems which are often incompatible with one another.

This means that, within the railways sector, we have neither free movement nor a common market.

If we are serious about creating an international, competitive railway, we must also create a common railways structure within Europe.

Coordination of the railway systems is especially important for those countries and regions which are not situated in the centre of Europe.

In order to be able to travel right through the EU, Swedish trains, for example, must be able to pass through several countries and, thus, several national railway systems.

At present, this involves an obvious competitive disadvantage and means that the centrally situated countries within the EU should be urged to coordinate their various systems.

For the same reason, it is also important for those countries bordering the EU to be able to be involved in the work on harmonisation so that there are no restrictions upon transport to and from third countries.

If compatibility is to be achieved, the specifications of a range of technical components need to be brought into line with one another.

What, however, is at least as important in terms of this change is that coordination should also be achieved within the operational and administrative systems, that staff should be duly trained and that there should be agreements in place to enable drivers to take trains across the national borders.

Road traffic in Europe is increasing each year.

It creates problems in the form of environmental damage, noise, overcrowding and accidents.

In order to be able to cope with this trend, methods of transport must become cleaner, quieter, safer and more efficient.

Railways are the means of transport which now best meets these requirements.

Rail transport must therefore become more attractive and competitive. In order to reach that point, however, the railways must be able to compete on the same conditions as other forms of transport.

The Savary report is therefore very important and one step along the road.

It is now just a question of all the Member States turning it into a reality.

Mr President, Commissioner, honourable Members, literature has a few well-known words for what we are discussing in the two Savary reports this evening: "You are late, but at least you are here" , was how Friedrich Schiller put it, words which also apply to our work here in the European Parliament.

To discuss the interoperability of the conventional trans-European railway system at the end of the 20th century, just as everyone is getting ready to leave, looks bad, even if, admittedly, interoperability has increased.

It has taken more than 100 years for us to pluck up the courage here and give the railways another chance.

And yet the facts do not look very promising.

The rapporteur has included figures in his report which are all the more significant for being so thin on the ground.

Mr Hatzidakis has already told us that the railways had a 21% share of the freight traffic market in 1970 and now have a mere 8.5%; in passenger transport, their share has fallen from 10% in 1970 to 6%.

The prospects for high-speed trains are somewhat more encouraging, although here too, not everything in the garden is rosy.

It is true that we have at least got something on the rails in western Europe, namely Thalys and Eurostar.

But where we want to network Europe in the long term, especially with the future Member States of the Union, things do not look any better.

Yet it is vital to win over Eastern Europe, which still makes relatively good use of the railway network, to interoperability with Europe before everything switches to the roads.

Incidentally, this must be done through dialogue with the candidate countries, as the Savary report rightly stresses.

On one point, there is a need for nostalgia: we want to maintain a small part of the history of Europe and keep historic railway lines in their original state.

We shall leave them out of the scope of our directive and the friends of the railway will thank us.

Interoperability is rightly not required where regional demands and solutions need to maintain their own legislation within the framework of subsidiarity.

In this context, a word to my Austrian Minister of Transport.

The southern railway in Austria is an old stretch of line and is of regional importance.

But, more importantly, it is the north-south link in the east of the present Union.

If we do not invest in it, the east of Austria will run the risk of economic exclusion in the future.

That is in nobody' s interest.

Austria is excluded from the Union at present more than enough as it is.

Let us end all forms of isolation and ensure that we have comprehensive interoperability in the Union.

Mr Rack, I repeat what I said to Mrs Flemming at the start of the night sitting: from an institutional and legal point of view, under the Treaty, Austria has every right to be in the European Union.

Therefore, let us deal with this issue when other points are under discussion.

Mr President, I believe that Gilles Savary has done magnificent work with these two reports.

The routes of the railway structures on our continent were set a long time before Schuman made his famous speech on the Quai d'Orsay.

In those days, military factors were given priority over the transport of people and goods.

In my country, Spain, as in Russia, a different gauge to the rest of Europe was chosen in order to make a possible military invasion more difficult, which proves that European construction was not the priority for those people who took the decisions on railway routes.

Furthermore - as others have said - almost every country has constructed its network in a radial manner, around its capital, which is a serious obstacle to all those who want to create a different kind of route, such as from Spain to Germany or Italy to the UK without passing, for example, through Paris.

Paris and many other capitals and almost all intra-European borders act as barriers for through rail routes.

For this reason, the transport of passengers and goods by rail has been suffering for decades.

We have managed to harmonise the European economy, but the current rail network is not a useful instrument for the single market.

Therefore, we resort to road transport, despite the fact that it creates pollution and is dangerous.

We must free the citizens of Europe from the road monopoly by offering them working railways throughout the Union which are competitive in relation to other modes of transport.

The inclusion of a social clause seems to me to be an excellent idea.

The railway workers are going to play an important role in interoperability and their interests must be addressed in the text of the directive.

These workers have already paid the price for our forgetfulness.

Their number has decreased by 500 000 in the last 15 years.

It is possible to revitalise the railway, as certain projects that have already been undertaken demonstrate.

A Community which is undergoing a rapid process of integration and which is facing imminent enlargement needs to improve the efficiency and quality of the railway services it offers to customers.

As Mr Savary says, this would contribute to achieving the objective of sustainable mobility and greater social and economic cohesion in Europe.

Mr President, one of the European Union' s key goals was the creation of the internal market, but this market has created a volume of traffic which is growing at an alarming rate.

Despite this, we need to ensure that goods and people arrive at their destinations faster, more efficiently, at cheaper rates and in cleaner conditions than before. Rail transport is not really a great help in this respect, quite the reverse, in fact.

Let us be honest, the train has remained stuck in the nineteenth century.

In percentage terms, trains have certainly not retained their share in transport. We can only hope that they have retained it in real terms.

Trains have proved the European Union right: more competition keeps you alert and on the ball.

Well, due to a lack of competition as a result of excessively protectionist behaviour on the part of the Member States - and I am not ashamed to admit this - the train has been condemned to a second-class position even in this century, also in terms of technology and even durability, which certain Members have emphasised. Trains are not durable and they are no longer clean, especially the diesel locomotives.

We have finally reached a point in Europe where we are about to try to bring about a change in mentality. This is desperately needed, and about time too, for the sake of both the people and mobility within the European Union.

We can no longer rely on road transport alone for it is fraught with problems, pollution, traffic jams, increased risk of accidents, as well as the problems which an increasing number of people are facing with the swelling flow of through traffic zooming past their doors.

If the rail systems can overcome the obstacles facing cross-border transport, i.e. by using each other' s rail infrastructure and if they make their equipment more durable, then this will relieve the pressure on road transport.

Rail systems develop extremely slowly. In France, for example, this is because the government protects its own market and in the Netherlands, it is because we never manage to bring a procedure to a close and to start doing the groundwork.

As a result of this, planes are still used in Europe for short-haul distances.

Naturally, high-speed links such as those from Paris to Brussels should have superseded the plane a long time ago, but because of the vulnerability and sluggishness of the present trains, many prefer to take the plane.

It is not just manufacturers and governments that should be represented during the decision-making process pertaining to rail systems - in respect of which, incidentally, there is much room for improvement - but also the railway companies themselves.

This is already the case in the technical field, in the form of the European Association for Railway Interoperability.

This should also be the case for railway legislation, right across the board. After all, railway companies have the necessary in-house expertise and need to be involved in the entire process.

The requirements for admission to the railway network and cooperation between the railway companies and the EU leaves a great deal to be desired.

Take, for example, the night train from Amsterdam to Milan which will be introduced from 28 May.

This route covers Germany, Geneva and Italy.

Each country has its own set of rules regarding speed, safety and travelling comfort. Only if these requirements are met can access be gained to the railway network.

This beggars belief, especially if the rules change and are adapted virtually by the day, as has been the case.

This makes the interoperability of the European rail systems almost impossible in practice.

What we need are harmonisation and standardisation as soon as possible, if we want to create a true internal market for rail systems.

Mr President, the vast majority of investments that have been made in the EU' s infrastructure have been made at national level.

As a result, a lot of things work well within our countries.

However, the deficiencies become apparent as soon as it is a question of crossing a border.

In spite of the fact that there have been several attempts to solve the problems, partly within the International Railway Union, this is especially the case in the area we are discussing here this evening, namely that of Europe' s railway networks.

As long as we have obstacles of this kind, there will also be clear limitations of at least two different kinds.

Firstly, there will be a deterioration in the prior conditions of Europe' s being able to compete with other markets where these problems have perhaps already been solved. Secondly, there will be a deterioration in the prior conditions of the railways' being able to compete with other types of transport.

There is no doubt that the railways have been the big losers in recent decades, and remain so.

From a position, thirty years ago, when it had a more than twenty per cent share of the goods transport market in the EU, the railways are now down to having a share of less than ten per cent.

At the same time, the market share for passenger transport has almost halved.

It is just not an option to force goods or passengers back onto the railways.

The railways will become winners in the market if they become efficient and are given the opportunity to develop by their own efforts.

Otherwise, there is an obvious risk that Europe' s railway network, at least where goods transport is concerned, will no longer exist within a few decades.

For this reason, it is a step in the right direction when the Commission seeks so-called operational compatibility within the railways sector.

The next step is to help extend the EU' s internal market to embrace the countries of Eastern and Central Europe, too.

Common operating systems and businesslike pricing should benefit Europe' s railway networks but, if the railways are to survive in the long-term, at least two additional things are required.

Firstly, a diversity of operators is required.

Just as there are many haulage contractors on Europe' s roads, there ought also to be many competing railway companies.

Secondly, a distinction needs to be drawn between the national operator and whoever owns the track.

That is the model we have in Sweden, and I believe in fact that it would be marvellous if similar systems could be introduced in all the EU' s Member States.

Otherwise, the confusion between public authority and operator will continue to be an obstacle to the development of Europe' s railway networks.

In general, this means that an awful lot remains to be done even after the decisions which the European Parliament is making in conjunction with the present report. These nonetheless constitute extraordinarily important steps in the right direction.

I would like to speak on this particular subject but from a regional aspect.

I cannot speak about high-speed railways in Northern Ireland, never mind the island of Ireland, because the railways do not go at any great speed in that particular part of the world.

It is extremely important that we recognise the importance of a railway system.

One thing that has concerned me recently in my region is that, in Europe, we talk about how important to regions it is that we should have the most environmentally friendly type of transport.

At the same time within my area people are talking about doing away even with parts of our present minute railway system.

We have one of the main links between Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland between Dublin and Belfast.

This is a very important link and one that has been upgraded recently.

Probably that would be up to at least half the standard of the rest of continental Europe, but it is very welcome to those of us who live in that area.

Then we have the link between Belfast and Larne which links us to the rest of the United Kingdom.

Parts of this have had to be closed down because there is not enough money to keep it in repair and upgraded.

We have also recently had Northern Ireland Railways tell us that they are going to close the link between Coleraine and Londonderry which is absolutely unbelievable and totally unacceptable.

This is the one commuting area from the Northwest and it takes in part of the Republic of Ireland and the inner shore and peninsula.

They need that railway system as a link for those who want to get to Belfast to reach airports and everywhere else.

So we have to take a really serious look at what we are talking about here.

For too often within Europe we have talked about trans-European networks - be they road-rail, air or sea - but at the end of the day we are not prepared to put in the finance at either European level or national level.

We have to take on board the challenges that come before us and we have to ensure that we have a very highly established rail link.

I certainly want it within my region because that is important.

There should be no more closures and we should make more finance available to improve the present railway system to have more goods moved by rail and not by road, which is totally unacceptable from an environmental point of view.

It is hurtful when I go back to my region and am told the money is not there.

It is hurtful when you go back and you are told that: "No, we must improve the road system - we must not improve the rail system".

The rail system has a tremendous future.

It is wrong, it is totally unacceptable that it is allowed in any way to be run down.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the Commission wishes to begin by thanking you for this interesting debate and thanking Parliament for the fact that you attach such great importance to the question of the interoperability of the conventional rail transport systems.

I want to highlight the excellent contribution which has been made by the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism, especially by MEP Mr Savary who has prepared the report.

The directive must be seen, in the first place, as a technical measure, but the proposal is, of course, also of political significance in so far as it helps implement a common and open market for railway services and railway materials.

As is well known, the Commission has made the railways sector into one of its priority areas for taking action.

This was especially made clear in the 1996 white paper on the revitalisation of the Community' s railways.

As early as the end of last year, the EU took a large step towards revitalising railway transport when it introduced the so-called railway package.

I am convinced that this can contribute to a renaissance for goods transport in the Community.

Above and beyond these measures, further efforts are required if the strategy is to be complete.

By this, I mean primarily measures which integrate the national networks and increase the quality of the public services.

We all know how different the various countries' technical standards and operating regulations are.

This has also emerged clearly in the course of the debate.

This makes international transport both more expensive and more complicated than domestic transport.

These differences affect not only interoperability but also the internal market for railway equipment.

The Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism has adopted an amendment to the report and, in that way, backed our own proposal.

Most of the amendments to the report are acceptable.

A series of amendments entail actual added value, something for which we wish to thank Parliament.

As you know, the Council too has examined the proposal and, thanks to contacts between Parliament' s rapporteur, the Presidency of the Council and the Commission' s officials, it is entirely possible that the proposal may be adopted as early as at first reading.

A prerequisite for its becoming a reality is the desire to pursue a genuine convergence policy even where an essentially technical document is concerned.

When it comes to the amendments, I only wish therefore to deal with those which are unacceptable.

First of all, Amendment 9, Article 1(3).

The area of applicability is established in Annex I and cannot be limited in the way proposed.

Those cases which are mentioned may be dealt with as special categories, as special cases or, at worst, as exceptions.

The proposed change is incompatible with the idea that the technical qualifications for interoperability are to be introduced gradually.

Nor does it fall in with the need to prioritise those measures which provide the greatest benefits in terms of cost.

Where this is concerned, there are legal obstacles to acceptance.

Amendment 32, Annex I, together with Amendment 35 on exempting passenger carriages from third countries.

The proposed wording is unacceptable because it means a fundamental change to the rolling stock referred to in the directive.

The principle which the Commission upheld before the Council and the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism and upon which the proposal is based is that the directive must embrace all rolling stock used on the trans-European railway network.

This is important for the purpose of promoting the internal market for rolling stock and also for the purpose of guaranteeing a minimum level of safety the length of the trans-European railway network.

In order to achieve this minimum level of safety, all rolling stock must fulfil certain minimum specifications.

Amendment 39, Article 18(3) and Amendment 40, Annex VII.

The proposed measures are incompatible with Article 14(2) which specifies that it is the Member States' responsibility to make sure that the system complies with the STI, or spécification technique interopérationnelle, regulations.

This proposal could be introduced into the framework directive concerning railway safety which the Commission will be introducing later this year.

Clearly, however, exceptional instances of transportation or, for example, locomotives involved in track maintenance do not need to fulfil the same requirements as passenger trains.

The proposal therefore mentions a number of special cases (cf. Article 2 K and Article 5(5)) where special, suitably adjusted regulations may be applied.

Allow me to leave the other amendments, because they all have our support.

They help make the directive clearer, especially the special cases.

Otherwise, they involve acceptable supplementary provisions, for example certain cases exempted from the technical specifications.

I would conclude my intervention concerning the interoperability of the conventional rail systems by thanking Parliament for its efforts.

We must hope that it will be possible to adopt the directive as early as at first reading.

The directive will take on a key role when it comes to revitalising railway transport.

I now move on to the second report, which concerns the interoperability of high-speed trains.

In this case, too, Mr Savary has prepared an interesting report containing a number of constructive observations and proposals.

The Commission will examine them in detail and, as far as possible, take account of them in planning its activities.

The Commission' s report was more concerned with the implementation and effects of Directive 96/48 than with the actual progress made towards the interoperability of high-speed trains.

This has to do with the fact that the railway network in question is still at an early stage of development.

Parliament' s proposal for carrying out an assessment of how much progress really has been made on interoperability is therefore very interesting.

Where the conventional railway network is concerned, the Commission proposed that a common representative body should provide, and regularly update, a facility to help monitor progress.

At the request of a Member State or of the Commission, this would provide a picture of the trans-European rail system for conventional trains.

The Commission has examined all the proposals in the report on the interoperability of high-speed trains, and they constitute a welcome contribution to the Commission' s ongoing deliberations in this area which continues, of course, to be given high priority.

It is generally known that the railway sector is of crucial importance in terms of Europe' s future transport needs and a more sustainable European transport system.

Increased interoperability is a key factor in our endeavours in this area.

It is very pleasing to have it confirmed through today' s discussion that the European Parliament and the Commission see the issue in much the same way.

Mr President, Commissioner, we and the rapporteur, Mr Savary, have gone a long way towards accommodating the Council by including umpteen proposed amendments here in plenary in order to reconcile the two versions.

The Council should accept our opinion and the Commission should support us, not the Council, Commissioner.

Secondly, please be so kind as to point out to your employees that the report is not from the Committee on Regional Policy, but from the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism, because we are devising a transport policy for the whole Community, not just for the regions.

Mr Jarzembowski, the name of the committee is the "Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism".

The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.

The next item is the oral question (B5-0223/2000) by the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, to the Commission, on the installation of the MOX demonstration facility at the British Nuclear Fuels site at Sellafield.

Mr President, the report on safety at Sellafield, published by the UK Nuclear Installations Inspectorate, is a damning indictment of safety at the plant and falsification of safety checks there.

In mid-February Chief Inspector Laurence Williams said that he himself would pull the plug on the THORP reprocessing plant if his safety recommendations were not acted on.

However, it is clear from his own report that BNFL cannot be trusted.

The response to previous recommendations by the NII was to ignore them.

Indeed, I have documents showing this to be the case as far back as 1981.

This shows arrogance, even when they are called to account.

What are we to make of the fact that this investigation by the UK Nuclear Inspectorate resulted from a press report in the UK Independent, following which the UK Government sent in a posse, as it were - the Nuclear Inspectorate.

Surely it should have been the other way around.

We received continuous reassurance regarding the safety of EU nuclear installations, so why does it need a press investigation to alert Member State governments to serious safety issues?

It is time that the citizens of Europe received detailed answers to the questions of the effect on safety and the environment of the falsification of data in the MOX facility at the BNFL Sellafield site - falsification that has been ongoing for some years - because of the seriousness of the questions it raises for the safety of MOX fuel in use and for the nuclear installation's safety generally.

It also raises questions for the transport of nuclear material such as MOX fuel and, indeed, for nuclear safeguards because of the production of plutonium stockpiles.

Indeed, I would ask what level of Euratom safeguard efforts, personalities, site visits etc. has been deployed on that site since 1996 since when, we are told, reprocessing in the UK has been performed under Euratom safeguards?

I questioned Chief Inspector Laurence Williams in committee on whether the inspectorate staff in the UK were going native and imbibing the cultures that they are there to control.

He gave me a serious answer.

Do they also imbibe the cultures that they are there to control?

I would also ask you to deal seriously with the harmonisation of minimum standards, because here we received conflicting answers in committee.

I am also directly concerned with the effects of reprocessing on neighbouring states, such as my own, where radioactive contamination from Sellafield has been found on the east coast beaches, in particular Carlingford Lough, where I grew up.

Local people often ask me what the EU is going to do about it.

I can give them very short answers.

Denmark and other Nordic states are also concerned at the radioactive contamination of their seas and fishing grounds from reprocessing at Sellafield.

I believe the scandal of abuse of safety at Sellafield is a European question.

In particular, the high-level waste tanks pose a serious, on-going risk to the east coast of Ireland because of the risk of a release of large amounts of radiation should the cooling tanks overheat.

The Nuclear Inspectorate's report stressed that the amount of high-level liquid waste continues to increase faster than BNFL can deal with it.

The THORP reprocessing plant produces continually more waste.

It is this plant that the inspectorate threatened with legal sanctions if the backlog is not cleared.

Reprocessing by its nature produces large quantities of liquid waste.

For more than 40 years high-level liquid waste has been stored in tanks at Sellafield under constant cooling.

It is now urgent that we cease reprocessing and that the high-level waste tanks be shifted to passive containment such as vitrification.

Even then, they will still be highly radioactive for more than 50 years.

The problem for BNFL is that the amount of high-level liquid waste produced by reprocessing continues to increase faster than it can deal with it.

The NII would like to see the minimisation of the amount of high-level liquid waste stored in order to reduce the potential hazard.

I would suggest that this could be done by ending reprocessing now.

In committee I also queried whether a culture of corruption had spread to the independent quality assurance verification by Lloyd's Quality Assurance who verify that BNF procedures comply with health and safety requirements.

Last September it published a report stating that BNFL has high-quality management in terms of health, safety and the environment.

As this was clearly inaccurate, according to the regulator's report, this independent verification now lacks credibility.

I have already talked about going native in regard both to Euratom and the UK inspectorate.

This is the polite euphemism for corruption, and that is what we must control here.

The Chief Inspector recommended that the high-level waste tanks and the serious risk resulting from the inability of BNFL to make them passively safe through vitrification was an urgent issue.

I would ask what does "urgent" mean in this context?

Must we wait for years more of serious risk to the health and environment of people in the British Isles and Europe generally?

The Commission is informed of the events surrounding the falsification of the pellet diameter data at the MOX demonstration facility and the BNFL Sellafield site.

We are closely following the developments and have made direct contact both with the UK authorities and with the company.

The Commission is highly concerned with this event which raises questions in relation to nuclear safety.

Before I refer to the specific aspects raised by Mrs Ahern in her question, I would therefore firstly like to state that we cannot tolerate any negligence in relation to nuclear safety within the present and greater European Union.

The neglect of internationally agreed nuclear safety standards should be openly and firmly condemned.

I am therefore grateful that the European Parliament decided to debate this important issue in plenary tonight and to adopt a resolution later this week.

Let me now turn to the first specific issue which is the implications of the MOX data issue for the safety of nuclear installations.

Let me first remind the honourable Members that under the International Convention on Nuclear Safety the responsibility for nuclear safety rests with the state having jurisdiction over a nuclear installation.

It is also clear that our Member States do not wish to give up this responsibility.

I therefore need to refer to the UK and the NII report on the falsification of the data which states that the nuclear installations inspectorate is satisfied that the fuel manufactured in MDF will be safe in use in spite of the incomplete QA records caused by the falsification of some AQL data by process workers in the facility.

That is a quote from their report.

However, the inspectors' report on the control and supervision of operations at the BNFL Sellafield site also stated its opinion on the deterioration in safety performance at Sellafield.

The company has reacted to the requirement of the NII to produce a programme responding to the recommendations in the report.

We are now awaiting the formal reaction of the inspector to this programme.

Secondly, on nuclear safeguards: according to the investigations carried out by the UK nuclear installations inspectorate, the falsification of data occurred during a secondary manual diameter check of a sub-set of the MOX pellets in the Sellafield MOX demonstration facility.

As far as Euratom nuclear material safeguards are concerned, checks of the diameter of pellets are not covered since operators' declarations for safeguards are based on pellet weights and not on a diameter measurement.

Therefore the verifications performed by Euratom safeguards did not indicate that these declarations had been incorrect.

Thirdly, in relation to the transport of nuclear materials, transport of radioactive material is implemented according to regulations that are elaborated by the IAEA and transposed into national legislation.

Therefore, also for the transport of radioactive material the prime responsibility lies with the Member States.

As such the measurement deviations at Sellafield do not have any consequences on the safe transport of pellets.

However, the Commission welcomes any decision which would increase even further the safe transport of nuclear material.

The Commission has as its objective to promote the harmonisation of the regulations in the field of transport of radioactive material, which would increase safety in the field.

Finally, regarding the concept of proposing a Euratom directive for harmonising minimum standards for nuclear safety in the European Union and its value in discussions of nuclear safety with the accession states: individual EU Member States' safety requirements are more specific and demanding than those of the International Atomic Agency.

Because of different historical background, legal framework, type and numbers of reactors and different approaches to regulation, they cannot easily be harmonised into a set of common rules.

My concern is that any attempt to achieve a consensus on a set of common Euratom safety standards might only result in a very generalised set of rules and principles.

As such they would be unlikely to improve on current nuclear installations' safety standards.

It is therefore unlikely that harmonising minimum standards at an EU-level would have been able to prevent what happened at Sellafield.

There are, however, several activities at Community level where harmonisation would be both beneficial and possible.

These activities are based on common recognition of national requirements and the promotion of best practices.

One area where there is scope for in-depth harmonisation is in relation to new types of facilities.

I do not see any obstacles to future harmonisation of rules in the field of safe management of radioactive waste and decommissioning of nuclear installations.

In the context of enlargement, a directive setting out harmonised minimum safety standards might have facilitated our early discussions on the very sensitive issue of nuclear safety.

As part of the Community's acquis it then would have been routinely screened together with other EU legislation.

However, it is difficult to say if such a directive would be developed quickly enough to play a key role in the ongoing discussions with the accession states.

It is also difficult to prejudge if common minimum standards would give us the level of safety that we wish the accession states to aim for.

We have in fact set our sights and those of the accession states beyond such a level.

We are working to encourage the applicant states to apply the good practices in use in the European Union.

One example of this is the development by the DG-Environment of guidelines for periodic safety reviews of the Soviet-designed light water nuclear reactors.

Another major step forward was taken only last week with the setting up of a European nuclear installation safety group.

It will bring together nuclear power plant operators and nuclear regulators from both Member States and applicant states.

I can assure you that the Commission will do everything it can to pursue the objective of a high level of nuclear safety, both within the present Union and an enlarged one.

I am convinced that more could be done at Community level to achieve this.

However, it is not clear that a directive requiring the harmonisation of safety standards at a European level at this moment in history is the best way forward.

It is very important that we retain a sense of perspective, a sense of proportion about this issue and I welcome the balanced response from Commissioner Wallström.

It is very important that we stick to facts and avoid some of the wilder claims that have been put in the Green motion for a resolution on this issue.

I want to emphasise that safety was not compromised in the incident of record falsification.

I would like to quote also from the NII report that the fuel manufactured in MDF, the MOX Demonstration Facility, will be safe in use in spite of incomplete quality assurance records caused by the falsification of some acceptable quality-level data by process workers in the facility.

The NII takes this view on the basis of the robustness of the fuel manufacturing process and the totality of the checks made on the key parameters.

I would also like to draw colleagues' attention to the positive response by BNFL to the two reports made by the NII, one on the records incident and the other on the control and safety management regime at Sellafield.

I welcome the response and their three key recommendations to improve the safety management system and management structure by implementing a comprehensive overhaul of the safety management system across the company. To improve resource availability by taking on more monitoring staff, by improved training and further emphasising the safety culture and thirdly, to improve independent inspection, audit and review by appointing independent senior compliance inspectors and the like.

BNFL has responded positively to the 28 recommendations in one report and 15 recommendations in the other, the falsification report.

I do not propose to go through those in great detail.

Let us not lose sight of the fundamentals here.

Regulatory safety mechanisms worked in this instance.

Members of the staff reported the error and then the regulatory procedures took their course.

There was no actual breach of safety, only a breach of record-keeping regulations for one particular customer.

The offence of falsification of records must not negate or obscure the long-term case for reprocessing or MOX fuel assemblies.

Both of these are forms of recycling.

Both of them are effective ways of reducing, of concentrating waste and in the case of MOX manufacture are the best answer known presently to the issue of safe disposal of weapons grade plutonium.

I welcome the Western European Nuclear Regulators Association WENRA which was formed just over a year ago in February 1999.

I welcome their launching of a project aimed at harmonising its members' safety rules and practices.

The regulators themselves are undertaking this job across Member States: who better to undertake that task?

The result will be an enhanced safety culture and that is to be welcomed by all.

Mr President, the vast majority of United Kingdom citizens or indeed EU citizens were deeply shocked and dismayed at the recent events at BNFL.

Let me quote BNFL's own words: "At company level it has been recognised that in the mind of many stake holders quality and safety are inextricably linked.

Failure to comply in one aspect of an accredited quality system has led to a major loss in confidence in BNFL overall."

That is from a management which is now aware of its shortcomings, a management that foolishly engaged in staff reductions, now reversed thank goodness.

The highest standards are required of any nuclear installation.

I have considerable sympathy for the workers at BNFL let down by a sloppy management.

They will now speak out whenever they see evidence of lack of safety culture.

I do not want to talk at this stage about the viability or wisdom of reprocessing nor about the economics of MOX.

That is not under debate, although those matters should be debated in the UK and elsewhere.

BNFL is now in for a very difficult period and deservedly.

The main reason this is being raised in the European Parliament is to point out the lack of European harmonised standards in the nuclear industry.

There are harmonised standards in almost every other aspect of European industry.

The Euratom Treaty is deficient and that must be rectified so that we can have the sort of directive we need.

We cannot really contemplate enlargement without some sort of acquis communautaire in the nuclear sector.

The Commissioner says she does not feel it advisable to produce a communication.

Please come to our committee Commissioner and we can discuss this further.

I think one is needed in the near future indicating how we could achieve more harmonisation - of course not at the lowest standards in existence but at the most stringent.

If you want public acceptance - and many of you do - of the nuclear industry, you have to ensure that.

Commissioner you say that as far as new facilities are concerned, if there are to be any, you feel that there is a case.

I really do not see the difference, and I urge you to reconsider what you have said this evening to come to our committee, look at this one case as an example of what we need for the public of Europe and for the workers in our nuclear plants.

Mr President, what the investigations into this incident show is what can best be described as a culture of management incompetence and one of complacency.

The report by the Nuclear Installations Inspectorate in February of this year into the safety records found that these records had been systematically falsified.

The processing of spent fuel from 34 plants in 9 different countries was thrown into doubt and, indeed, Japan, Germany and Switzerland stopped sending material - and quite rightly so - to Sellafield.

This whole sorry tale has added to the UK's reputation, as sordid as it is often inaccurate, as the "dirty man of Europe".

I believe that all at Sellafield must accept collective responsibility for the things that have gone wrong and must act to improve them.

A number of improvements have been made: the new chairman of BNFL has undertaken a fundamental review; a number of people have been dismissed.

However, there is a lot yet to be achieved and there is a long way for the UK to go, and for BNFL to go to re-establish its reputation.

I would ally myself with the concerns of Mrs McNally, when she asked the Commissioner to look again at these matters.

The fact is that the Commissioner telling us that the rules of individual Member States are more specific is simply not good enough.

We need high minimum standards and, in particular, we need those standards in the light of the accession of candidate countries, many of which are more reliant on nuclear technology than existing members of the Union and have much older generating capacity.

The importance of European Union action in this matter is that it will be a confidence-building measure, and what the public want are confidence-building measures.

I recognise and feel deeply the concern expressed by colleagues in the Republic of Ireland and Denmark.

The fact is that we need legislation to implement what is called for in the motion put forward by the three main political groups tonight: high minimum standards for the safe and reliable design, construction and operation of nuclear and nuclear-related installations, as well as for nuclear-safety management systems.

My group cannot support the Green motion here tonight.

We feel that it treats the matter in too gargantuan terms.

It raises the perfectly legitimate question of whether nuclear reprocessing should continue at Sellafield.

But one cannot conduct this debate in the terms employed by the tabloid newspapers.

We support the motion put forward by the three major political groups because we believe that improvements need to be made, improvements are being made, but that those improvements will be encouraged by an EU-wide approach to this whole matter.

We recognise too the great significance of this plant for employment in west Cumbria and we believe that should the future of the plant be thrown into jeopardy then the European Commission must come forward with special measures to help regenerate other employment in the area.

This is a saga in which nobody, least of all Sellafield, comes out well.

But it is an area where action at European-Union level really can make a difference.

Mr President, I wish to begin by thanking my colleague, Mrs Ahern, for raising this very important issue.

No one in this House could have been anything but appalled at the recent events linked to Sellafield, with the falsification of MOX fuel data and the Nuclear Installation Inspectorate's report on the low level of safety procedures at the plant.

Following the initial defensive response by BNFL, it was only when that report was published that the real scale of the problem emerged, that the falsification of figures had apparently been going on secretly since 1996.

Wales, like Ireland, has suffered from the radioactive contamination in the Irish Sea, due essentially to Sellafield.

There has been a theory about a link between a high incidence of childhood leukaemia, for example, and proximity to the Welsh coastline.

Now, added to that, we have a situation where any confidence the public had in the safety of the plant, and therefore their own health and safety, has been destroyed.

It is this crisis of credibility in the management of British Nuclear Fuels which may actually bring about the end of reprocessing.

BNFL was determined to press ahead with the Sellafield MOX plant to keep reprocessing going.

But one of the reasons why British Energy, which accounted for a third of Sellafield's reprocessing work, decided to shift from that to waste storage was on economic grounds.

It was cheaper for them to store waste, and evidence published recently by the nuclear-free local authorities confirms this view.

So, with the problems of the environmental pollution and the effects on health, as well as the issue of cost and the debate about the cost, what justification is left for nuclear processing?

It is not worth the risks associated with it and, as the resolution states, the Council, the Commission and Parliament must reconsider this whole issue, including the production of MOX fuel, in the light of recent events and in the interests not only of people in Ireland and Wales but also in the whole of Europe.

British Nuclear Fuels has an obligation to deal with the levels of waste that Mrs Ahern mentioned earlier in the safest way possible.

That issue too is one of great concern to me because an area of Wales has been mentioned as a possible site for storing low-level radioactive waste.

The nuclear industry has caused enormous damage already and we have to be certain that more and more communities and people's lives are not blighted by its legacy in future.

Mr President, an essential requirement in parliamentary work is rigour.

For the sake of this rigour, I would like to remind you of four facts relating to the case of the falsification of manual measurements of the diameter of MOX fuel pellets at the British Nuclear Fuels installation at Sellafield.

Firstly, we are talking about secondary and superfluous controls at the request of a client, not a safety requirement; secondly, no nuclear safety requirement was violated; thirdly, there was no risk of radiation whatsoever; fourthly, no safeguard clause of the Euratom Treaty was violated since the measurements of the weight of the pellets were correct.

We are therefore talking about a dreadful case of a lack of professional ethics, which has done enormous economic and public relations damage to the company concerned, but this case had no implications whatsoever in terms of the safety of workers or the public.

Nevertheless, a mishap like this reminds us, despite its trivial nature, of the need to give utmost priority to the constant control and improvement of the procedures in an installation such as the Sellafield reprocessing plant.

This is the view of the British regulatory authority.

This is clearly demanded in the resolution supported by our Group and we hope that this will be complied with in the future.

Mr President, we must not be under any illusion that the falsification of quality control data at Sellafield was not a most serious matter.

I suspect that the small number of Members of this House who have kept in touch with the plant, both the management and the workers' representatives there over a good number of years, felt the issue more keenly than most.

It exposed a poor safety culture and an inadequate secondary control procedure in the manufacture of MOX fuel.

However, we should note that the response of BNFL to the nuclear inspectorate report has already resulted in very significant management changes.

These have been welcomed both by the inspectorate and by the minister responsible.

I hope that in that regard they will not be accused of having gone native on this particular issue.

I would suggest that one of the roles of Parliament should be to monitor the ongoing management changes that are taking place.

We should also note that the chief inspector and the Commission made very clear to the industry committee that there were no safety implications at any of the Sellafield installations.

Nuclear safeguards were not an issue, nor were there safety issues in relation to transport of nuclear materials.

I am glad that the Commissioner has reinforced that view this evening.

The fuel can be safely used for the purposes for which it was manufactured.

But to say all this must not lead us to be complacent.

We seek to apply standards to the applicant countries in eastern Europe and, I would suggest, beyond the applicant countries in eastern Europe.

European Union standards applicable to all nuclear installations are still something that most of us want to see.

We know that the Western European Nuclear Regulators Association is seeking harmonisation.

I would hope that the Commissioner, as other colleagues have asked, will reconsider her position and actually support and encourage WENRA in this objective.

I am absolutely convinced, on the basis of my own experience in a number of countries that this is the way to reassure public opinion.

It is the reassurance of public opinion that must be our main objective as a Parliament.

Mr President, I have been a Member of this Parliament now for sixteen years.

I believe I am accurate in saying that literally in every one of those sixteen years the concerns of the Irish Government and the Irish people about the nuclear processing plant in Sellafield have been raised in this Parliament.

I am always conscious, as I look around, that probably every light bulb in this Chamber is lit by nuclear energy, which explains the reluctance among many of the major European nuclear powers to address seriously the concern we have in Ireland.

Our concerns have been expressed by successive governments to the British Government.

They have largely been treated - I regret to say - with indifference and indeed, very often with contempt.

There now exists in Ireland a total absence of any trust in relation to reassurances about the safety of the nuclear plant in Sellafield.

The recent information about the falsification of documents just added to the deep sense of unease that is shared by people throughout our island.

We are a country with all risk and no benefit from this plant.

We are aware that the Germans and the Japanese are sending their nuclear waste for processing to Sellafield because it is politically too uncomfortable for them to do it in their own countries because of concerns about this.

I ask the Commissioner to reconsider her point.

I also ask her another question: are any of the non-nuclear countries on the nuclear safety committee you mentioned?

It is time that we realised that we must count the cost of processing the waste from these nuclear facilities as an intrinsic part of the cost.

It is, generally speaking, more comfortable to leave that out, but this is a matter of extreme concern to the Irish Government, the Irish people and happily, also to the Danish Government.

We are joined in our concerns by them as well.

Mr President, I asked to speak in this debate not just because I am a Member from the north-west region of England where the Sellafield plant is situated, not just because there could be 10 000 livelihoods at risk if Sellafield was closed, and not because I have any vested interest in the nuclear industry.

I asked to speak because I want to try and help to get some truth into this debate.

The trouble is, when you talk about nuclear issues - especially Sellafield - it is dominated by a distortion of the truth.

When Mrs Ahern spoke, she spoke of the NII giving a damning indictment of the plant.

She spoke of the damning indictment on safety checks.

It made three safety recommendations and the checks were quality assurance checks, as other speakers have said.

She said the report came from a press statement in The Independent.

The workers at BNFL raised the issue.

They were the ones who discovered it.

BNFL were the ones who told the nuclear installations inspectorate and their customers what had happened.

She spoke of contamination of the seas in Ireland and Denmark.

I quote from The Independent where seven prominent Danish scientists, who actually study as a professional interest the releases of radioactivity from Sellafield, said on 12 May: "There is no scientific basis for the claim that the present release of radioactivity from Sellafield causes an unacceptable contamination in the North Atlantic and Arctic regions".

When your mind is made up facts only confuse the issue!

She spoke of the scandal of abuse of safety.

That is an absolute insult to the people who work there, and more so to their families who live near that site!

Those workers would not work in that plant if they thought it was unsafe.

They would certainly not put their families at risk it that was the case.

That is an absolute indictment of those people who work there.

Then she finished by talking about corruption.

That really is the last throw of the dice.

Finally, I say to the Commissioner: the one thing you should do, apart from listen, is to pay a visit to Sellafield and find out the facts for yourself.

That is the best advice that I can give you and many Members of this Parliament also.

Mr President, as a Cumbrian - born, bred and resident - and one of the representatives of north-west England, there is nobody in this Parliament who has been more affected by the reverberations arising from recent events at Sellafield than me.

There have been real lapses in the way in which it has been managed.

Those lapses quite simply are not acceptable.

Speaking as a Cumbrian I know a lot of people in my home county - which I have the privilege to represent - feel let down by British Nuclear Fuels.

But as has already been pointed out, there have been no breaches of the law or of the regulator's rules and guidelines.

In a society subject to the rule of law recent events cannot be used to close the plant.

I know that there are many people who would like to see Sellafield closed down.

In particular I know this is a very strongly held view in parts of Ireland.

In a free society, if that is how people feel, they must be allowed to articulate their opinions.

But that is no reason why the plant should be closed.

There can be no question of any lawfully established enterprise in any part of the European Union being closed by the public authorities without its breaking the law.

This true in Ireland, Denmark, the United Kingdom or any other Member State.

The owners - that is to say the United Kingdom Government - and the employees of Sellafield have legitimate interests which quite simply cannot be swept under the carpet.

This applies in this case just as much as to anybody else.

Finally, just as the recent crisis at Sellafield has been self-inflicted, so the solution to it lies in British Nuclear Fuels' hands, as they themselves understand.

They must be matched by deeds - their deeds.

From an Irish perspective we are witnessing the beginning of the end of reprocessing at Sellafield and we have allies.

The powers of the Commission in this area as the responsible Community institution remain hopelessly inadequate, embarrassingly inadequate.

No uniform standards for safety and discharges, no Community consultation procedure concerning power stations sited near frontiers, no clear Community provisions for the storage and transport of nuclear fuels or nuclear waste, no adequate Community system of information and monitoring in cases of nuclear malfunction.

Nuclear safety in the enlargement process is a major cause for concern.

As there are no prescribed criteria in EU law governing the design or operation of nuclear facilities, how do we judge their safety of operation?

Realists accept and understand that life is full of risks.

Society usually accepts a certain level of risk in return for an advantage and proponents of nuclear energy almost inevitably remind us of the balance of risk and benefit.

What benefit accrues to Ireland for the risk of being exposed to the majority of Britain's nuclear installations?

If nuclear safety and nuclear energy are so safe, why are not the majority of these installations located near the population centres of the south-east of England?

To minimise the risk to these population centres of course.

But seen from an Irish perspective, this stands logic on its head, we have counties Antrim, Down, Louth, Dublin, Wicklow and Wexford where the vast majority of the population of the island of Ireland, about 2 million people, live on or adjacent to the Irish sea where the majority of British nuclear institutions are sited.

Furthermore in recent years, we have all seen how consumer concern about the integrity of the food chain can devastate a once seemingly secure market.

Witness the BSE and dioxin problem.

We can only begin to imagine the effect of any kind of nuclear scare - just a scare - on these sectors of our economy.

Choice about exposure to risk for oneself or for one's children is a very basic human right.

This right to determine, to control, to have any say about the risk of nearby concentrations of nuclear installations is denied to those of us who inhabit the western shores of the Irish sea.

In practice, nuclear decision-making in the UK falls far short of democratic standards.

Often questionable decisions are made behind a wall of secrecy.

The reality of Sellafield goes beyond the contribution to the Kyoto targets on the dependence of the UK economy on nuclear energy.

It also includes a litany of unreported incidents, falsified quality control checks on MOX fuel rods resulting in the loss of confidence by the Japanese in safety standards at the plant and the cancellation by the Germans and the Swiss of mixed oxide nuclear fuel pellets.

The reality of Sellafield includes incidents last September and early this year of deliberate sabotage, allegedly by members of the staff.

Serious doubts are being raised about the long-term viability of reprocessing.

Their order books are full for a few more years, but no new orders are coming in due to the quality of control lapse at the MOX plant.

Even the new CEO, Mr Norman Askew, is reported as saying that reprocessing is not the big part of the business it once was.

A director has publicly stated the future of the plant is in doubt.

But a nuclear future for Sellafield can be justified: not mixed oxide fuel production, not thermal oxide reprocessing at the MOX and THORP plants.

The skills and the experience of the workforce and the major capital investment could and should be redirected towards waste management and the creation of a centre of excellence for decommissioning and that is what I suggest we concentrate the debate on.

I have received five motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 42 (5) of the Rules of Procedure.

The vote will take place on Thursday at 12 noon.

(The sitting was closed at 11.45 p.m.)

Adoption of the Minutes of the previous sitting

The Minutes of yesterday' s sitting have been distributed.

Mr President, I would like to make a comment in relation to yesterday' s Minutes.

I do not appear amongst the signatories of the attendance register.

I was present all day yesterday and during the vote which took place at noon, but I do not appear in the Minutes.

I would be grateful if this error could be corrected.

We will check the list, Mr Valdivielso de Cué, and make the necessary correction.

Mr President, I would like to inform the House, under Rule 111, that last Thursday, the offices of the Moss Media Group in Moscow comprising independent television and a number of newspapers and magazines were raided by so-called tax police, uniformed and armed.

Documents were taken away, the telephones were cut off and threats of legal action remain.

Mr President, this matter is one of the utmost importance.

It involves freedom of the press in Russia and further outrages are expected over the next two or three days.

Mr Robin Cook is in Moscow today.

He will discuss the matter with Mr Ivanov, the Russian Foreign Minister, and the 15 Ministers are thinking of a joint démarche.

But we in the European Parliament - what are we doing?

The matter is, if you like, too urgent to take on board because it happened last Thursday and cannot be brought forward as an urgency.

Could you please refer this question to the Conference of Presidents so that some system can be found to deal with very urgent and important matters such as this one?

We take note of your comment and your suggestion, Lord Bethell, and we will pass them on to the President.

Mr President, I would just like to make the House and the Presidency aware, as I believe it will be of interest to them, that yesterday, on the occasion of the Conference of Reconciliation in Vienna, an agreement was reached between the Austrian government representative, Mr Schaumeyer, and the American Deputy Finance Minister, Stuart Eizenstat, on compensation payments for the victims of Nazi forced labour in Austria.

The lawyers - and I feel I should take the opportunity to mention this as well - Michael Hausfeld and Martin Mendelson, who represent some of the governments of Eastern European countries, commented at the time that, in some respects, Austria is in fact providing more generous compensation payments than Germany, because in the first place, we are including the agricultural workers, and secondly, we are also paying compensation for children under the age of 12 and women who gave birth whilst in forced labour camps.

I believe this is worth sharing with the House.

Thank you for your statement, Mrs Stenzel.

The next item is the report (A5-0134/2000) by Mr Katiforis, on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, on the Commission recommendation for the 2000 broad guidelines of the economic policies of the Member States and the Community (drawn up pursuant to Article 99(2) of the Treaty establishing the European Community).

(EL) Mr President, broadly speaking, the report tabled before plenary by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs contains a particularly positive appraisal of the Commission' s recommendation for the broad guidelines of the economic policies of the Member States.

The committee has worked with its usual efficiency and diligence and has supported its proposals with an impressive econometric analysis which I should like to praise here in public.

The recommendation for the year 2000 has been formulated at a time of favourable developments and optimistic prospects for the European economy.

The prospects of an increase in the national wage in Europe in excess of 3% for 2000 and 2001 - 3.4% according to the latest forecasts for 2000 - are much higher than the disappointing actual average rates of increase throughout the 1990s.

These results, provided that they are realised, offer a window of opportunity, a springboard from which the European economy can launch on to a course which will lead to a permanently high and ecologically sustainable rate of growth.

It goes without saying that permanently high rates of growth are the sine qua non for improving the employment situation and strengthening the competitiveness of Europe in the global economy.

The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs accepts that the requisite rate of progress is best expressed through a growth rate of GDP of 3% or more, that this rate cannot be maintained over time without a substantial rise in the potential product of the EU economy and that there can be no increase in the potential product without productive investment. The Commission, however, has avoided specifying the ratio of investment to GDP.

The Committee on Economic Affairs takes the view that quantitative economic targets may be useful, but insists that the fixing of such targets must not undermine the goals established in the stability pact, which are the fundamental guide for the economic policies in the euro zone.

Despite this general reservation, the report by the Committee on Economic Affairs expresses the committee' s satisfaction at the restatement in the Commission recommendation of the quantified target, set in the Presidency conclusions of the European Council at Lisbon, of raising labour force participation from 61% to 70% of the population by 2010 and of increasing the participation of women from 51% to over 60% by 2000.

The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs maintains that the requisite economic growth must be based on price stability and budgetary discipline, reasonable wage increases taking account of price stability, productivity increases and a reduction in unit labour costs, even in the case of reductions in working hours.

It also believes in greater liberalisation of competition, strengthening national competition authorities, providing special support for associations of small- and medium-sized enterprises and further developing the single market - especially in the public utilities and financial services sectors.

As far as financial services are concerned, having reached a broad consensus of agreement, we shall be tabling a joint amendment calling for the action plan for financial services to be applied more quickly, i.e. by 2003 rather than 2005.

The majority of the committee believes that mobilising the market will result in the need to increase investments using purely market instruments.

At the same time, however, it approves of the restructuring of government spending in favour of investment which must be justified - when it is justified - by the cost-benefit ratio, but rejects using public investments simply to manage the economy.

On a more general note, the committee approves of the challenges identified by the Extraordinary Council in Lisbon of full employment, a knowledge-based economy, modernisation of social protection systems and dealing with the impact of the ageing population, but expresses its concern at the gap between the key challenges and the often routine specific policy recommendations.

It therefore calls upon the Commission and Council to seriously consider the need for a drastic renewal of the intellectual apparatus behind the general guidelines.

The committee also reiterates Parliament' s previous call for an interinstitutional agreement between the Council, the Commission and the European Parliament on the subject of the adoption of the resolution, although it thanks the Portuguese Presidency for its willingness to cooperate on this matter.

This is ad hoc cooperation, however, not cooperation reflected in an interinstitutional agreement, and we consider this a shortcoming in our procedure.

Ladies and gentlemen, we achieved a significant degree of consensus in our work in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs.

I should like to stress the general acceptance of the feasibility of the objective of achieving full employment within the next decade.

Of course, there are certain differences in our assessment of the best way of achieving these targets.

Some of us believe that setting quantitative targets, even without mechanisms for imposing them, would help Europe give concrete expression to its efforts to move in the right direction.

This comment applies in particular to the target investment rate, which requires us to increase the potential rate of growth of the economy to 3% on a permanent basis.

This percentage is a familiar figure.

The Commission set it repeatedly in its studies and it would not have hurt to have included it.

We could also have given more categorical expression to the, I believe, general feeling that we need to relaunch the trans-European networks and address the need for new forms of financing for them and the issue of the involvement of private capital and public investment in this sector.

Without, in any way, giving the green light to squander public spending, we could have tried to give the public sector of the economy a slightly more positive role than merely that of 'guard-dog' for price stability.

There are margins for all this, especially through the window of opportunity, if the main risk to our economy is from the probability of a crisis on the American money markets which could paralyse the private investment mechanism.

Just imagine, ladies and gentlemen, if that were to happen and we, in the meantime, had forgotten how to handle public investment.

The European economy has a huge margin for growth; it is true that the European economy can become more productive, but we need to be bolder in the way we go about it.

Mr President, when drawing up this draft opinion for the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, the Committee on Social Affairs fully appreciated the importance of this resolution, Parliament' s first resolution on economic policy guidelines since the Lisbon Summit.

In particular, it stressed the importance of the connection between these two priorities and considered that the common elements of the broad guidelines of economic policy should be fully exploited and the various implementing processes adopted by the Councils over the years coordinated, and by this I am referring to the objectives of the Luxembourg, Cardiff and Cologne processes.

In our opinion, the open method of coordination, which was introduced on an experimental basis in Lisbon, should allow for the full exploitation of the connection between growth and employment, which, we feel, cannot be ignored.

The subsidiarity principle needs to be steered in this direction with regard to the role both of the governments and of the decentralised institutions, without diminishing the decisive part played by greater synergy, greater coordination between the broad guidelines, and by placing greater focus on the European Community dimension with a view to developing an economic policy which can enhance the potential for development in Europe and allow us to effectively achieve the goals which we set ourselves with regard to full employment.

We have taken the chapters of the broad guidelines into account, in particular the aspects related to the introduction of flexibility and efficiency elements in the products market, the financial services market and the labour market, but we have also acknowledged the importance of the negotiations of the Social Partners and of social objectives.

A further consideration: we consider - and for the remainder we refer you to the text of the opinion - that Parliament' s role in this matter must be consolidated by formal institution of the procedure laying down a specific interinstitutional agreement on the participation of Parliament in formal consultations on the economic policy guidelines and on the monitoring of their effects.

Mr President, the Liberal Group will support the Katiforis report on the broad guidelines for economic policies, which we are especially satisfied with since many of our observations were accepted during the debate in committee.

At a time when we are debating the weakness of the euro, at least in relation to the dollar, I think that we would do well to remember that the state of the European economy is solid and offers a framework for stability and solidity as well as excellent prospects for growth and employment. In short, we can look forward to very positive development over the next few years.

Therefore, the fact that, in some ways, the US economy is doing better than the European economy, at least in terms of growth forecasts, should not mask the fact that the European economy is doing well at the moment.

Furthermore, it is the European economy which is funding a good portion of US development.

However, we should not only be concentrating on the more positive aspects; we should also be taking note of the fragility of continued growth and solidity in the European economy.

In order to overcome this fragility, in our view, we need the European economy to function better, since it is still subject to excessive corporate rigidity, in both the public and private sectors, and on the part of both economic and social operators.

We therefore propose greater adaptability and flexibility in the labour market.

This would clearly involve the removal of the existing obstacles to the proper functioning of the European internal market and a deep reform of the tax system, with the adoption of a tax package at European level. To sum up, we should overcome the conservatism which still exists in certain economic and social areas of the European Union.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, let me tell you why the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance did not vote in favour of the Katiforis report as amended by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs.

Obviously, we endorse the general thrust of the Katiforis report.

In particular, we approve of the ambition to achieve full employment as well as its ambition in terms of sound social and, above all, salary agreements.

On the other hand, we did not endorse a raft of amendments which we considered to be extremely dangerous.

We shall reject these amendments. Indeed, we shall reject them systematically, and we hope within the current parliamentary term to convince our fellow Members, including those in the Group of the European People' s Party, how dangerous they are.

In the first place, we can no longer continue to call for the flexibility of wage contracts to be reformed and increased without specifying our thinking more precisely.

Endorsing the goal of a European society which is as competitive as possible in terms of know-how means maximising investment in human capital.

Well, enhanced human capital is not a commodity to be taken and then dispensed with, but rather something to be respected, something that is offered to an individual by allowing them time to be trained, to gain and enhance experience.

So if there must be structural reform in wages, then it must be in the direction of greater, and not less, stability in employment.

There is a second fundamental point of which I desperately hope to convince my fellow Members in the next five - now four - years, and that is that we cannot claim to wish to respect the Kyoto Agreement by the year 2008.

We are aware, and the report acknowledges as much, that, at the moment, it is contradictory to attempt to reconcile an objective of 3% annual growth with the rejection of the urgent requirement to invest in energy saving, transport systems, in improving accommodation, in such a way as to make the Kyoto objectives and the objective of 3% growth compatible.

- (EL) Mr President, the Commission' s recommendation for the broad economic guidelines for 2000 may well accept a return to full employment, but it has stood by the basic approach of previous years.

Although I recognise the contribution made by Parliament and our rapporteur in gaining acceptance once again for the concept of full employment, I think that the rapporteur himself, whom I congratulate on his efforts, would agree that we need to redefine what we mean by employment and by full employment.

What does employed mean when we have before us a policy which dismantles working relations, minimises employment and, as a result, makes general poverty a mass phenomenon.

As far as its general approach is concerned, the Commission' s recommendation forms part of a more general neo-liberal economic and social policy which, with the support of the majority of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, finds expression in the report under discussion.

As far as we are concerned, the basic policy objectives should be to support public investment, stable, permanent and full employment, protect and improve the social security system and the system of social protection in general and strengthen active demand by improving the purchasing power of the workers.

This is the direction the broad guidelines should be taking.

The amendments which we propose to the European Parliament move in precisely this direction and we call on our fellow members to vote in favour of them.

Mr President, reading the broad guidelines for the economic policy presented by the Commission for the year 2000 leaves one with a strange impression that something is missing because nowhere is there any mention of the single currency, except in a brief and fleeting reference, stating the importance of the Maastricht criterion regarding the rationalisation of public finances or the need to gear monetary policy towards price stability.

There is not a word, however, on the current depreciation of the euro and its influence on the economy and economic policies.

This seems all the more surprising because every few pages the Commission document reiterates the idea that efficiency demands an overall strategy.

The same is unfortunately true of the European Parliament' s report since, out of the 35 points raised in the resolution, not one relates to the single currency, and it is only briefly referred to in the recitals.

Apparently, the rule of silence is prevailing, as it did when the major groups within Parliament rejected the proposal from the Union for a Europe of Nations Group to organise, as of today, a debate on the implications of fluctuations in the euro.

This debate has been deferred once again, even though there is a great deal to be discussed.

For years, all the economic and financial advantages a strong euro was going to offer have been trotted out for our benefit.

Now the euro is weak, are we to assume that the loss of these advantages has no implications worth mentioning?

The weak euro favours exports, as is often boasted. It also, however, presents serious disadvantages which are concealed, such as the misappropriation of capital, third party buyouts of euro zone businesses or weakening of the incentive for structural reforms, even though these are so necessary.

Finally, the basic problem still remains.

This depreciation in the euro has occurred because it is perceived as an artificial currency, but until this is clearly stated it will not be possible to remedy the situation.

In this instance too, then, let us hope that the European Parliament agrees to organise a debate in the near future, before it is too late.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, having scarcely emerged from the dull 80s, Europe has been plunged into the throes of international speculation.

We were promised a euro-cum-mark that would be stronger than the dollar, and which would compensate for the weakness of economic growth by means of the on-going revaluation of assets.

We have an ersatz currency whose volatility is enhanced by its non-identifiable character.

Formerly, speculation on the exchange market involved the pound.

This is nothing particularly surprising for us Members of the European Parliament who are accustomed to seeing Europe operating on a daily basis amid differences and antagonisms.

What will the situation be like after enlargement, when the markets will react to any event affecting any one of the thirty odd countries which make up the European technostructure?

It would almost be like the United Nations issuing a currency.

This reduction in the value of the euro is not something that Mr Duisenberg can do anything about, as this European Central Bank, whatever they say, is the brainchild of the two main States in the euro zone, and the French and German Governments have given the order to do nothing.

In order to maintain the value of the euro in relation to the dollar, we should have to raise euro interest rates to a level which is slightly higher than that of the dollar, perhaps to a level in the order of 50 base points.

From my standpoint as a post-Keynesian, I see this as having little impact on economic growth, since this depends on various other factors, the most important of which are psychological.

Obviously, we cannot agree to all assets located in France being devalued if the downward slide of the euro continues beyond the short term.

If this should happen, and obviously we hope it does not, then we should have to point the finger at the parties responsible, and this would not mean Mr Duisenberg.

We shall judge the candidates in the French presidential elections according to the efforts they have made to get us out of this bind.

Mr President, the report is self-contradictory.

Paragraph 14 supports the Stability Pact' s demand that price stability should always precede employment-related considerations.

Elsewhere, the desire is for higher employment and more democratic influence upon economic policy.

However, inflation should always, of course, be between zero and two per cent.

This is something that is supported, even though inflation has only stood at that rate for a period of six years in post-war Germany and Denmark.

It is now quite certain, however, that this state of affairs will always be best for all countries at all times.

We no longer have any need for elected representatives to devise the right policy mix.

We have a Central Bank which establishes interest rates on the basis of inflation.

In this way, the euro is allowed to depreciate and interest rates are increased with the result that there may be lower rates of growth and increased unemployment.

It is worse than the sacred cows in India, yet the report does not protest against this.

In paragraph G, on the other hand, a new sacred cow is to be found: that of high taxation.

Social security arrangements must be critically examined and social expenditure reduced, but savings can also be made on social expenditure by making higher employment the top economic objective.

In that way, people receiving cash benefits and unemployment benefit will be able to exchange these for proper wages.

That is an alternative recipe for economic policy, but one which is contrary to the Treaty.

The balance of trade deficit is normally to be no more than one per cent of GNP, irrespective of whether the money is used for investments, which can subsequently produce much larger deficits again. This would seem to be something which no amount of elections in the Member States or in the EU Parliament can change.

This is absurd. It runs counter to all experience and is a denial of the principle of democracy which unites our countries and which means that voters can go to the polls and vote in favour of higher employment, even if inflation might, as a result, occasionally rise above the two per cent mark.

Mr President, I enthusiastically support the further deepening of integration.

Many matters are best dealt with at Community level, but when I read the report of my colleague Mr Katiforis - which provides several guidelines which are favourable to the market economy and therefore worthy of support - I cannot agree with some of the proposals in it.

The dynamism and desired growth of the European economy will not come about by creating Union-wide integrated programmes, whether they be applied with good intentions in the area of training or entrepreneurship or whether they be common support systems for the benefit of SME organisations.

I also have my personal doubts about the superiority of a European scientific community, if it is to be created from above, i.e. by the volition of the Commission and the Council, and not allowed to develop naturally through networking between the scientific communities, from one business or university to another; financing, both at a national and European level, must naturally be secured.

Something which I have reservations about is the faith in the importance of top-level structures which stands out in this report; a programme and planning from the top may actually put the brakes on development rather than make it dynamic.

At present, European dynamism will be improved by dismantling top-level structures, for example, barriers to trade, which are still hindering the creation of a genuine internal market.

This is what Mr Katiforis is also calling for, albeit of the Commission, when it should be demanded of those nation states, which - in a few individual cases - practice obstructionism, for example, in the areas of transport, public procurement or energy.

When discussing economic policies in the context of this report, we should not forget about competition policy.

Recently, the neutrality of the Communities' competition policy has been called into question - justifiably so - inter alia in the case of Volvo-Scania.

The reason given for regional monopolies and concentration of power in regions with a small population base is rather lame.

It is clearly a real blow to the industry and trade of small and remote countries while they are making efforts to increase their competitiveness within the Union area.

Mr President, I congratulate Mr Katiforis and Commissioner Solbes, both of whom have displayed a broader than usual understanding of what is necessary for a successful economy.

We must take advantage of the fact that we are in the European Union to do things collectively.

I wish to concentrate on research and development.

I regret that the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy did not draw up an opinion on Mr Katiforis' s report - it should have done.

Compared to the US and Japan, we are woefully lacking in a proper research strategy in almost all Member States except Finland, Sweden and the Republic of Ireland - countries shown in the Commission paper to have had unusual success.

We need scientists in order to have research and development.

Let us stop young people choosing to do other things.

Let us ensure that competence in widely-used languages is increased.

Above all, let us look at the salaries paid to scientists and technologists.

That is what makes them choose other careers.

Of course, we need infrastructure in science facilities and communications.

Jacques Delors spelt it out in his White Paper, so we do not need to reinvent his thoughts.

However, the big difference between us and the successful economies of the world - the US in particular - is that they spend far more money on investment in science, and it pays off.

Commissioner Busquin' s communication on the European research area is very good.

However, what is important is the next stage: transferring that knowledge into goods and products and processes which can be sold.

Let us be innovative in the European Union.

Let us start by bringing the innovation unit back from Luxembourg to Brussels, where it can use its skills working with other departments of the Commission.

That would be a not very revolutionary but a sensible thing to do.

Mr President, as everyone is pointing out, the euro has just lost almost 30% of its value in sixteen months, but the European Commission, like the Central Bank, does not seem to be in much of a hurry to learn the lessons of this experience, as that would be liable to challenge the current monetary policy which benefits only stock exchange transactions and speculation.

The ambition to achieve full employment and a modern economy, as declared in Lisbon, are indeed laudable objectives, but they are now effectively coming up against the liberal yoke.

In its document on the broad economic guidelines, the Commission pursues this liberal approach, and these guidelines now represent the reference text for the coordination of economic policy in the Member States.

The Commission, indeed, shows no compunction in issuing orders to this or that State with a view to drawing up its budget.

It clearly stresses the target of budgetary streamlining, even going beyond the requirements of the Stability Pact.

Following the example of the Central Bank, it demands wage moderation as well as structural reform of the labour market, especially in order to make it more flexible.

The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs' report is in line with this approach and with the continuation of the Lisbon decisions.

It advocates accelerating the liberalisation process as well as the process of applying pressure to wages. It proposes increasing the flexibility of the labour market.

This is why I am unable to approve of the guidelines contained in this report, especially when made exacerbated by the many amendments introduced by the right wing.

The current economic situation, particularly with the decline in the euro, ought to lead the Union and the Member State governments to strive towards the reorientation of European policy, so as to enable it at last to fulfil expectations regarding social issues.

We must shake up the dogma of the Stability Pact.

We must reverse the current approach, which makes social policy nothing more than a consequence of economic and monetary policy, responsible only for making good the damage caused by the market by means of a policy of aid.

This new policy should be particularly based on support to investment that creates jobs by means of a selective policy of credit, the improvement in living and working conditions and a reduction of working hours without flexibility or increased precariousness, taxation on income and financial measures to curb speculation and to release new resources.

Mr President, I would like to congratulate the rapporteurs on the very points which so displeased the previous speaker, i.e. the sections of the reports which display a liberal approach.

In fact, as recent events concerning the euro illustrate, the European Union and the institutions are currently at a crossroads: we have the choice between the road to prosperity and growth, undertaking radical structural liberalisation reforms that Europe must implement boldly, and the road of preservation and the perpetuation of a corporate, statist vision of the economy which is condemning many European countries to levels of unemployment which are two or three times higher than those in America and to a marginal role in the most innovative and dynamic sectors of the economy.

Having said that, I cannot fail to welcome the Katiforis and Pomés Ruiz reports, which clearly stress the way in which the liberalisation and flexible nature of the markets - especially the labour market - the dramatic reduction in tax pressure, a thorough reform of state pension systems and the gradual separation of state and economy - first and foremost through the privatisation of public companies - are all choices which cannot now be put off any longer if we want to avoid building a Europe which may well be united, but united by unemployment, marginalisation of the most vulnerable, in particular women and children, and by the endless red tape surrounding the social initiatives of the society, a Europe, that is, which will fail to create either growth or employment.

This is one of the shortcomings of the euro, a currency which is suffering from a structural crisis and inflexible, excessively regulated markets.

Some say that political control of the economy at European level would be a way of resolving this crisis.

If political control has to be a means of control which transfers the interventionism of national economies to Brussels, this would be a bad move.

We Italian Radicals are also in favour of political control, but federalist, liberal control, with a limited number of clear laws and no state intervention in the economy, even by the European State.

Mr President, the present draft resolution by Mr Katiforis contains many valid points.

We should, however, qualify one key point concerning a matter of principle.

Both the Commission' s recommendation and the resolution claim high economically sustainable growth as the highest good and pursue this remorselessly.

This is odd, given the global relations in which the rich West is seen as an exclusive residential neighbourhood.

Do we really need so much growth or can we combat unemployment by other means?

The lopsided emphasis on material goods is bound to have a detrimental effect on our society.

It stimulates egocentricity, social exclusion, a blurring of moral standards and moral decay.

The corruption of society eventually harms economic development.

On a positive note, attention is paid to the effects of an ageing population on the sustainability of government funds.

Only since 1999 have both government expenditure and revenue fallen.

A further consolidation, a reduction in the debt burden, is desperately needed in many Member States, so as to ensure that funds are available in future for health care and provision for old age.

Taxes and social security contributions in the European Union are high compared to the United States, but the picture changes fundamentally when we consider the sometimes extortionate insurance premiums which American citizens have to pay.

The amendments which aim to shift the tax burden from labour to the use of scarce raw materials and minerals receive our support.

After all, the Kyoto Agreement more than merits compliance.

Mr President, I want to associate myself this morning with those people who have spoken in this debate and expressed some desire to challenge an atmosphere of complacency about the current state of the European economy.

I share the view expressed earlier by Mrs McNally that you can look to the United States and see that there has been investment in research.

That is one of the reasons why the United States is doing better than Europe. But we must also emphasise that one of the other reasons why the United States continues to do so much better than Europe is because Europe has not yet properly addressed the issue of structural reform and market liberalisation.

I refer to the remarks made earlier by Mr Lipietz for the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs.

I am very pleased to engage in a debate with him over the next four years on this issue of market liberalisation.

The fact is that we have not yet seen the agreed market liberalisation within Europe applied in some Member States, not least his own.

I have a shared concern about the jobs of workers.

I would be very pleased to bring Mr Lipietz to speak to workers in the United Kingdom who may lose their jobs as a result of decisions made by a French owner of energy companies in the UK, when British companies are not allowed to gain access to the French market because the French have not applied agreed European policy.

That is a structural reform we must drive through.

It is not just in that area.

We see that the wealthiest states within the European Union continue to be the states that apply the strongest amount of state aid.

That is robbing the jobs of some of the poorer states who are represented here.

That is also one of the reasons why I do not share the view expressed by Mr von Wogau in relation to competition policy.

My concern, where decentralisation is concerned, is that there should not be a repatriation of competition policy.

Mr President, over the past few days, the debate on a European economic government has gained momentum once again in different quarters.

It is evident that more economic management is required at European level, but it is not so evident that only the 11 euro zone countries or the Ecofin Council will need to take on that coordination.

At the Lisbon Summit, a decision was made precisely in favour of a wider socio-economic approach in which employment, economic reform and social cohesion are seen as being interrelated.

In my opinion, the key conclusion that was reached at that summit was that the European Council will itself adopt an active, guiding and coordinating role.

Each spring, our government leaders will discuss the socio-economic policy on the basis of an integrated progress report from the European Commission.

Unfortunately, spring had already started this year.

The text for the broad economic guidelines for 2000 had already been drafted, very much along established lines.

Why did the Commission not take more time and, in line with Lisbon, draft the guidelines in an interdisciplinary manner, as prepared by the different DGs?

Why do we not let the Commission continue with, and further develop, this type of cooperation, which also typified the preparatory work for Lisbon, in a socio-economic field?

That seems to me a highly interesting challenge for the Commission' s new Secretary General, David O'Sullivan.

I would suggest taking into account conclusion 29 of the present report, which advocates a drastic renewal of the intellectual apparatus behind economic policy-making to bring it in line with the Lisbon conclusions.

I would also like to make reference to the conclusions of this Parliament' s Committee on Employment and Social Affairs, compiled by Mr Cocilovo.

He proposes the drawing up of a single annual report on the economic and social state of the Union, and one set of annual guidelines for sustainable growth, employment and social cohesion.

One additional suggestion I would like to make is to include the socio-economic forum, which is scheduled for next month, earlier on in the annual cycle, i.e. at the very beginning of the year.

At the moment, it is just tacked on at the end.

Finally, I would like to draw the attention of the Members of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs to the consensus-oriented cooperation which we have enjoyed in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs in this sphere and add that we in this Parliament should break though the compartmentalisation and endeavour to rise above the hobbyhorses of this or the other side and to have an input in, for example, next month' s forum, precisely on that basis.

The Commission' s recommendation and report may be evaluated in the light of the euro system' s most fundamental problems, and these are undeniably major and glaringly apparent.

I come from a country whose people enjoy the rare privilege of being consulted in connection with such far-reaching decisions as participation in the euro system.

Among Danes, there is a great deal of scepticism about, and opposition to, the national currency being swallowed up by the euro.

I have no doubt that this scepticism and opposition are shared by large and growing groups of the populations of the other Member States, who are not being consulted.

I only have time to mention a couple of points.

The first is one which is extremely important to the whole problem surrounding the euro.

Nobel Prize-winner Franco Modigliani points out that, in his view, unemployment has certainly been used by the European Central Bank as an instrument of economic policy designed to control inflation.

The other absolutely crucial point I would mention is directly connected with the subject of the current motion for a resolution: the political weakness of the euro system.

What is missing, of course, is a political superstructure for steering economic policy.

This is the background to the French government' s proposal that the EU' s euro system should be equipped with a form of proper economic government.

It is these political consequences which are so crucial to the issue of the Danish people' s consent.

I can predict that the question of whether or not the euro zone is to be enlarged to include Denmark, Sweden and Great Britain will be decided in Denmark in the referendum on 28 September.

The scepticism I have expressed here continues to grow.

Mr President, the Katiforis report is no more than a mundane vindication of the broad guidelines for the economic policies of the Member States.

Of its 29 paragraphs, 8 go in for approval and then 4 indulge in self-congratulation.

As far as the working population of the countries of the European Union is concerned, there really is not much to be pleased about.

What use is the economic growth that the report boasts about, if it is only going to recommend - addressing employees of course - adopting a reasonable attitude in wage negotiations, going so far as to claim that the pension system must be radically revised with a view to protecting their financial position?

This is one way of admitting that there is no place in this growth for employed workers or for retired workers.

Once again, the Council and the Commission are acting as spokespersons for big business, asking Parliament to sanction it.

For our part, we have not been elected to offer congratulations to governments that come to the assistance of big business and major financial groups in order to enable them to accrue even greater wealth by exacerbating inequalities, leaving 18 million women and men unemployed, making flexibility at work and job instability more widespread, by making swingeing cuts in the total wage bill in order to ensure the continued growth of income from capital, including its most parasitic speculative forms.

If it is true, as the report states, that we have seen a return to growth, then it is all the more appalling that, throughout Europe, only a tiny minority benefits from it.

We shall therefore be voting against this report.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the European Union is having to compete with a series of challenges generated by globalisation and the creation of a new economy based on knowledge and new technologies.

The Union' s strategic goal for the forthcoming decade must be to ensure economic growth and free enterprise, without violating the social question, with guidelines based on competitiveness, sustainable development and the creation of new jobs.

On the subject of this last point, as the Katiforis report stressed, there has been a slight fall in unemployment in Europe, but unemployment is still unacceptably high, particularly as regards the level of unemployment among women and young people.

The situation appears worse in certain regions of Southern Europe, in particular in the South of Italy, where 21.9% of the workforce is unemployed, including 56.6% of the 14-25 age group.

Consequently, in my opinion, broad guidelines for economic growth and a rise in employment should include measures to render the European market more competitive and increase job flexibility.

In order to bring about sustainable growth, we need to finalise creation of the internal market and remove all the remaining barriers by liberalising those sectors which are not yet totally open to free competition, such as transport, gas, electricity and the postal services.

We need to introduce the reforms which will have to be implemented by the Member States in order to alleviate the burden on firms, reduce labour costs, sustain actions supporting lifelong learning in the context of a knowledge-based economy and support research to close the gap between Europe and the United States and Japan.

We need to facilitate public administration structural reform in the countries where excessive red tape is a barrier to private investment and bring the social protection and taxation systems into line with the requirements imposed by the new economic rules and with the constraints established by the Stability and Growth Pact.

Mr President, we do not support the Commission' s guidelines.

They are outdated and obsoleted by events and do not contain any prospect of a solution to the extremely serious problems which are both holding back economic development and, in particular, weighing down the citizens.

The proposed formulae will lead to ruin: flexibility at all costs, further dismantling of the Welfare State with pension cuts, the imposition of unjustified salary restrictions across the board, and even discrimination between regions, a decrease in public investment and obsessive recourse to the Stability Pact and the monetarism which have not only already caused irreparable harm in the past but have certainly not done anything to support a euro which is yielding increasingly to the supremacy of the dollar.

The acclaimed macroeconomic development for job creation is so tied up in the self-regulation of the free market that it has not yet created any jobs, rather it has destroyed stable jobs, while, in the worst of cases, contributing to keeping salaries low in precarious employment sectors.

This is not the way to fight unemployment, but it will heighten social poverty, increase the democratic deficit and feed public scepticism towards the democratic institutions.

Mr President, firstly I would like to thank the rapporteur and the committee for their magnificent work, and all the speakers in today' s debate for the additional ideas they have contributed, which will no doubt be useful to the Commission and the debate in the Council of Ministers.

Today, together with the broad guidelines for economic policies, other issues have been raised, particularly in relation to the euro.

When speaking of the euro, I would point out two things: firstly, I would ask that the problem be looked at in its entirety, not simply the exchange rate problem.

Secondly, I would point out that the Commission' s position remains the same; that is to say, clear growth and price stability must logically lead to an improvement in the euro.

This is not an issue we can go into today, but I wanted to make those points.

Today, we are discussing in particular the broad guidelines for economic policies.

The new broad guidelines differ from previous ones in that they partially incorporate Lisbon.

It has been said that they do not incorporate it fully.

This is true in the sense that Lisbon is too close to the presentation of the broad guidelines and the bulk of the work had been done previously.

Nevertheless, I believe that there were elements prior to Lisbon which anticipated or foresaw what was going to happen there and which have been incorporated into the broad guidelines.

Many of you have referred to the idea of full employment as a fundamental element.

Full employment, according to the Commission' s initial document - which formed the basis of the Lisbon decision - is something which can be achieved as long as the proposed policies are implemented.

The problem of full employment is patently one of our primary concerns.

We can put a figure on both our employment objectives as well as on what we take the expression "full employment" to mean, as some of you have suggested.

It all depends on what we consider the objectives to be.

It is absolutely essential, in speaking of these objectives, that we know whether they are political objectives or whether they represent the possibility of achieving certain economic results, as a consequence of the policies we implement.

In any event, I would say to those who are concerned about this issue that the quantitative and qualitative assessment of full employment will become more efficient when we implement the indicators relating to the different policies.

Some speakers have shown a degree of concern about the Commission' s habitual proposals on the flexibility of the labour market.

In our view, this flexibility will lead to a better balance in supply and demand in the labour market.

It will therefore lead to more employment, but also - as we have always argued - greater quality of employment.

This is something we have regularly stressed.

The flexibility of the labour market involves many other things: we can talk about regulating working time, but also the removal of all the obstacles which currently stand in the way of employment, such as tax-related issues.

A major point of concern throughout this debate has been the development of investment.

The central element of these broad guidelines for economic policies is trying to increase the European Union' s potential for growth.

If we are not capable of doing so, it is blatantly obvious that the current positive growth forecasts of over 3% will only last a relatively short amount of time and this trend will not be allowed to continue.

That is why public and private investment are absolutely essential.

Since 1997, investment has been increasing progressively.

By 2001, public and private investment should reach 21% of GDP and, in 2004, it should reach 23%, which would bring us very close to that objective of 24%, which was mentioned in the Commission' s White Paper on Growth, Employment and Competitiveness.

I would like to raise a point here which seems to me to be essential. In my opinion, there is no contradiction between greater investment, greater public investment, and the Stability Pact.

On the contrary, I believe that since the Stability Pact has allowed for the rationalisation of public finances, it will bring greater public investment in the future.

I agree with the view that, in these new circumstances, an improvement in the quality of public finances must involve greater public investment. This is a point which the Commission has highlighted in the different stability and convergence programmes and, clearly, it is a point which we must continue to stress.

Some speakers have also mentioned the importance of research and development and the new economy.

This is one of the key elements of the broad guidelines, but I would like to remind you - as I always do - that the main point of the introduction of the new economy is to improve productivity, which is the element which is most likely to bring future growth.

I would like to make an additional comment on two points.

Firstly, with regard to the interinstitutional agreement, which has been of concern to the Commission, and secondly, the problems of greater coordination in the face of greater subsidiarity.

With regard to the interinstitutional agreement, this is clearly one of Parliament' s recurrent demands.

It is also true that its implementation raises legal problems, as well as problems relating to the status of its participants, but I believe that, in any event, we should be satisfied with the progress made this year.

I promised you some months ago, when we discussed this issue in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, that the Commission would try to make the greatest possible progress with regard to its cooperation with Parliament.

It does not take the form of an interinstitutional agreement, but the presentation of the document on the results of the broad guidelines for economic policies, which will permit a prior debate in Parliament, seems to me to be a positive thing.

There are other more profound elements, such as the introduction of the idea of broader economic discussions, with the participation of Parliament, and the famous entretiens économiques, which will, in the future, offer us new opportunities and ideas for our political debate.

In my opinion, the Portuguese Presidency' s idea - which we support - of also establishing a debate with Parliament on these issues, not at an institutional level as suggested by Parliament, but of a different nature, is also clearly positive.

I believe that this is a good direction to take, and we must continue to cooperate in this regard in the future.

Lastly, I would like to point out that something has been raised which may seem contradictory between those who argue for greater coordination of economic policies and those who argue for greater subsidiarity in the way these policies are applied.

As you all know, economic policies are the responsibility of the Member States and, in this respect, subsidiarity is guaranteed.

In my opinion, the greatest possible coordination is essential.

I therefore argue that we should move ahead with the coordination of economic policies, making reference to the Member States' obligations.

I realise that for some of you this may seem like interference by the Commission in the responsibilities of the Member States, but that is what is laid down in the Treaty, in the legislation which we have created for ourselves, and that is the Commission' s mandate: to make specific recommendations.

I said that coordination is necessary, but I do not believe that this has to be incompatible with subsidiarity.

Greater coordination and greater definition of global policies does not exclude, however, the existence of an additional margin for action on the part of the Member States.

I would like to end my intervention by thanking you all for your contributions, your participation in the debate and for your majority support for the document presented.

The next item is the report (A5-0108/2000) by Mr Pomés Ruiz, on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, on the annual assessment of the implementation of the stability and convergence programmes (2000/2041(INI)).

Mr President, Commissioner, I am very happy to reiterate your closing words in the debate on subsidiarity or coordination.

I agree with you, Commissioner, when you say that there is no contradiction between these two terms, and that they should both be perfectly achievable.

Perhaps this debate, on the 11 stability plans presented by the countries participating in the euro and the four convergence plans, is a good time to review the harmonisation between the subsidiarity and coordination required by the introduction and future of the single currency.

This, therefore, is the flip-side of the debate which we have just held on the report by Mr Katiforis, and we must firstly begin to think about the instrument.

This is the first time that this Parliament has debated the 15 plans presented by the Member States.

I suspect that, in subsequent versions, the report will not be a single whole, but rather a detailed study will have to be made of the solutions, the weak and strong points, which this Parliament detects in the economic policies proposed by the Member States.

We are therefore going to ask for more detail in the plans which are submitted, in the structure of expenditure and also of income, paying particular attention to investments.

We would ask that the projections they make in the medium and long term take account of different scenarios relating to the development of interest rates, demographic development and other variables affecting the stability of our accounts in the long term.

We also ask in this regard - and I am returning to the debate on subsidiarity - for greater political commitment from the 15 national parliaments.

We believe that this is a task which falls to everyone, and not just to the European Parliament.

Some Member States have subjected the stability and convergence plans to internal debate in order to seek political support for this idea of jointly building economic unity, and we should ask the Member States who have not done so to debate these programmes in their parliaments in order to try, firstly, to persuade those states and parliaments to participate in this common task and, secondly, to provide political support for the commitments which are agreed to regarding the necessary coordination of economic policies.

Turning to the report' s proposals to the House, I am very pleased to note that all of the budgetary objectives established in previous programmes have been met, and even exceeded.

However, this cause for satisfaction is counter-balanced by the fact that, aside from the possible criticism that the objectives could perhaps have been more demanding and rigorous, we are seeing that the objectives have been achieved, not as a result of the interest and efforts of the Member States, but simply to factors such as the favourable development of interest rates or greater than expected tax revenue.

We therefore believe that, although budgetary consolidation must continue to be a priority, the economic environment - which has improved a lot - must offer us the possibility of speeding up consolidation and, at the same time, undertaking structural reforms in the medium term.

It is not acceptable for this relative economic boom to dissuade the Member States from making decisions - sometimes difficult decisions - on structural reforms.

These include, firstly, labour reform, which we discussed earlier.

It is clear that not all the states have implemented the labour reforms which we consider appropriate.

The improved performance of the labour market - which is clear - has been based on satisfactory economic growth, and not all the Member States have made the rigorous reforms that they must make, more radical reforms, to resolve the unacceptable problem of the high rate of unemployment in the European countries in comparison to other countries and which is not only an economic blight but also, and above all, a personal and family blight which cannot be permitted in the modern Europe of the 21st Century.

It is also crucial that we liberalise the telecommunications and energy markets, and not all countries are doing so in the same way.

With regard to tax reform, we should welcome the reduction in the high level of taxes in France, Germany, the Netherlands and Spain, and we should bear in mind that the high rate of unemployment often relates to the fact that we have high levels of tax.

In the long-term reforms, we should also include the serious problem of population.

In the programmes presented to us, we note that particular attention is given to the ageing of the population.

Perhaps it is time that we insisted that Member States resolve the demographic problem at source, through a suitable approach to both tax revenue policies and social expenditure, in order to protect families with children.

This is the way to tackle the problem at source, and not only its effects.

This is the only way we will prevent the old Europe from becoming a decrepit Europe.

Mr President, the Liberal Group supports the rigorous and demanding report by Mr Pomés Ruiz.

It lays out and highlights both the achievements and the shortcomings of the Member States in the way the stability and convergence programmes are applied, which, as I mentioned in my previous intervention on the Katiforis report, have brought satisfactory results for the whole of the European economy.

However, this current satisfactory situation must not mask a series of shortcomings and must lead to the implementation of the series of recommendations which the rapporteur, Mr Pomés Ruiz, correctly makes in his report.

He mentioned one of these recommendations in his speech: the need to take advantage of the current favourable situation, the healthy state of public finances - which on the other hand are disciplined by the stability and convergence programmes - in order to reduce the deficit, and possibly remove it completely, as well as to reduce debt levels, even to below the limits set in the convergence programmes.

This would mean that we could make far-reaching tax reforms which would contribute to a more favourable environment for our economy, for business initiative, to freeing up resources and promoting them by fiscal means in an area which is one of our priority commitments: to be up-to-date and competitive at the most advanced levels of the information society and in the application of new technologies.

I would like to conclude by arguing - and I believe this is one of the conclusions we must draw from Mr Pomés Ruiz' s report - for greater coordination between the Member States with regard to the implementation of these programmes.

I would therefore like to insist once again on the need for a genuine direction for economic and monetary policy at European Union level.

- (EL) Ladies and gentlemen, the Pomés Ruiz report has the good fortune to assess the implementation of the stability and convergence programmes at a time when the economic climate has helped these programme achieve success.

The rapporteur complains that the objectives are more the result of higher than expected tax revenues and the favourable development of interest rates than of the Member States' own efforts.

This perception betrays a rather narrow-minded budgetary policy.

In my view, there is nothing reprehensible about being able to achieve balanced budgets through development rather than by imposing fasting and prayer on the Member States.

To try and balance the budget solely by cutting expenditure, while, at the same time, wanting to reduce taxation, is something which goes beyond economic restructuring and the spirit of the Stability Pact, at least in my understanding, to limiting the involvement of the public sector in the economy.

It is something in addition to the Stability Pact.

This trend can also be seen from the reference to the fact that tax and social contributions in Europe account for approximately 46% of GDP, while in the USA and Japan they only account for 30%.

But they are higher in Europe because we have a social state.

If Mr Pomés Ruiz' s group wishes to change the policy on the social state, it should table it clearly and not tack it on to the Stability Pact.

I did not find one single reference in the report which justified Greece' s being singled out, as Mr Karas has done, but I should like to say the following, now that the subject has been raised: it is irresponsible to say that inflation in Greece has only fallen over recent months.

Inflation has fallen over eight years from 18% to 2%, thanks to constant and unstinting effort.

I had hoped that we warranted more generous support for this tremendous effort, which has required sacrifices on the part of the Greek people.

To say that Greece will be unable to sustain the criteria, I am sorry, but that is prejudging the facts.

How do we know that they cannot be sustained in Greece but they can be sustained in so many other countries of the European Union?

The Greek people are determined to apply the criteria and they will show their determination in due course.

Mr President, we support the main objective of the motion for a resolution under debate, that is, the need for consistently transparent budget regulation on the part of the individual Member States in line with the objectives of the Stability Pact.

However, we feel that, precisely in consideration of these undertakings and in the light of the current situation, the precise nature of any interventions cannot be identified in advance just for the sake of efficient budget control.

In fact, in a context where there are varying degrees of interdependence between States, there are too many variables at work to be combined to produce more general indicators.

I refer to the constant pressure with regard to restricting welfare expenditure, structural reform of the labour market and privatisation of the telecommunications and energy sectors.

On the other hand, we are aware of the need for a more effective convergence process, for economic cohesion and, therefore, also for the approximation of the single currency, whose oscillation is no longer virtual but is in line with prices and taxes; the need, of course, for more harmonious tax and fiscal policies, but also pricing policies; for more harmonious investment policies as regards both research and the closing of infrastructure gaps, including within the individual States, but also for greater homogeneity in the action of public administrations.

The most representative variable is certainly the time frames and contents of the Treaty reforms and the process of constitutionalisation of the Union, i.e. of a greater or lesser European political presence.

Mr President, I understand that it is not always easy, in a debate such as this, to differentiate between those aspects of our policy which we normally raise in the broad guidelines for economic policies, the stability and growth pacts or the references to the convergence reports, which will be the subject of the third debate this morning.

In the debate we have just held we rather confused the three elements.

I would essentially like to refer to the one which seems essential today, that of the stability pacts, although I will mention certain other points which have been raised.

Firstly, I share Mr Pomés' s view that we need greater coordination, which is not incompatible with subsidiarity, but I am also interested in his additional demands that we work in more detail on expenditure and income, the existence of different scenarios or greater commitments in terms of national policies.

However, I would like to remind him that, within the framework of subsidiarity, it falls to the Member States to define their own stability and growth programmes.

The Commission must judge them, but it is not our job to give instructions on this point.

Nor is it our job to give instructions on the stability programmes or structural reforms, which you have mentioned.

These structural reforms in fact fall within the broad guidelines for economic policies.

However, there is a point - the third which you referred to - which lies between the world of structural reform and the tax obligations relating to the deficit and, above all, the stability of public finances, in particular with regard to debt.

I am referring to the demographic problem and specifically the ageing of the population.

It is true that this is much more than a purely financial problem, but this is the concern which we highlighted in Lisbon.

I would say that, in this case - as in the case referred to by Mrs Randzio-Plath, of the need to compare the quality of programmes and greater harmonisation, or the reference by Mr Gasòliba i Böhm, for example, to deepening tax reforms - in our current thinking there is the reasonable prospect of fulfilling the objectives of the stability and growth programmes, and we believe that we must pay more attention to what we call the sustainability and quality of public finances.

We will present a report in May on this specific point, in which we intend to consider not only the nature of income but also the nature of expenditure as well as how the reduction in public deficit has been achieved and what instruments have been used.

These are instruments of a permanent nature which have the same characteristics in each of the Member States.

We will also tackle the issue of our future obligations.

In many cases the Member States have obligations which are not classed as debt, but which do, in fact, constitute debt in one form or another.

All of this will allow us to hold the debate which you have mentioned.

I believe that that will be the time to carry out this type of comparison in more depth.

Having said this, I am grateful for the effort you have made to assess the work we have done.

I believe that the problems of stability and convergence are basically characterised - as you have correctly highlighted, Mr Pomés - by the fact that, firstly, the objectives set have been met; secondly, because we are following the same line.

However, that fulfilment of the objective, especially with regard to the reduction of public deficits, has been less ambitious - surely as a result of an improved economic situation - and we must take advantage of that improved economic situation so that we do not move backwards, but that we make progress in the right direction.

I said that I wanted to make a couple of additional comments on two points that have been raised concerning issues which are not strictly related to this report, but with the previous report.

Mr Karas referred to the Greek problem and the problems of sustainability with regard to convergence criteria.

In the case of Greece, exactly the same criteria were applied as in previous assessments.

I understand that concern, mentioned in the Commission' s report, about the sustainability of inflation, but I would also like to provide some information which may clarify the situation.

According to the latest figures of the harmonised CPI - published on 15 May and concerning the month of April - Greek inflation is improving considerably in comparison to the previous situation: it has decreased from 2.8% to 2.1%; and the unharmonised index also shows better figures for April as compared with March.

Therefore, I believe that these concerns about Greek inflation are sometimes excessive.

Secondly, you will have to debate the problems relating to the amendments which you wish to raise in the Pomés report.

I will simply say, with regard to two amendments by your Group, that in one of them there is a small error relating to Greece' s entry into the exchange rate mechanism of the European Monetary System. In my view, in Amendment No 4, it would make more sense to adopt a more positive approach with regard to the Greek government' s future obligations than it would to adopt an approach which raises doubts as to its capacity to fulfil its obligations.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon.

Adoption of single currency by Greece

The next item is the report (A5-0135/2000) by Mr Goebbels, on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, on the proposal for a Council decision for the adoption by Greece of the single currency on 1 January 2001 (COM(2000)274 - C5-0226/2000 - 2000/0110(CNS)).

Mr President, Greece will be the twelfth country to sign up to the euro.

Greece does not have to beg to be allowed into the euro zone; it is fully qualified to join the States that will introduce the euro as an effective and definitive means of payment in 2002.

In Greece, the economic convergence criteria have been met, as a result of a stabilisation policy implemented most consistently by the Greek authorities since 1996.

At the beginning of the 1990s, Greece was considered the sick man of Europe, economically speaking.

The rate of inflation exceeded 20%.

The European Union officially described the budgetary deficit as excessive.

The public sector was notoriously mismanaged. Almost half of the public debt was due to on-going transfers from the state to public undertakings.

Today, major international bodies such as the IMF, the OECD, the Commission and even the ECB generally speak very highly of the efforts which the Greeks have made.

It must be noted that private operators have also discovered Greece.

In recent years, it has become a significant net recipient of foreign capital.

The stock exchange has undergone rapid expansion.

International rating agencies have improved their rating for Greek loans.

The situation is far from perfect, of course.

There are still problems, particularly regarding the restructuring of the public sector.

The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs stresses the following points.

Greece must continue to make efforts in order to ensure that the progress achieved in terms of disinflation has a lasting effect.

The government must step up the anti-inflationist bias of the economic policy instruments available to it, particularly in the fields of the budget and income policy.

Cooperation between the two sides of industry seems essential in order to maintain a situation of non-inflationary growth.

Even if considerable progress has been achieved in terms of the implementation of structural reforms, Greece must step up progress in the reforms which are still necessary, including the effective transposition of European legislation into national law.

Parliament has been consulted, in the context of a political decision to be taken by the Economic and Financial Affairs Council, after deliberation by the forthcoming European Council.

Parliament' s response can therefore only be a political one, in favour or against, like any final decision in a genuine democracy.

Greece' s entry into the euro zone does not entail any political risks.

Greece is entitled and, indeed, obliged to join EMU.

There are probably some economic risks but these are more significant for Greece than for the countries in the euro zone.

In joining the euro zone, Greece will be forced to maintain the culture of stability which has been established since 1996, and this involves pursuing a responsible economic policy.

This has, however, already created a virtuous circle leading to sustainable, non-inflationist growth, proving that stability is not an end in itself but that it must serve the purpose of healthy growth.

The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, by an overwhelming majority, therefore urges Parliament to vote in favour of Greece' s accession to the euro zone in 2001.

Mr President, let me add a few more personal observations.

I should like to congratulate the Danish and Swedish governments on having decided to consult their citizens regarding accession to the single currency.

I hope that the results of these plebiscites will be favourable.

In the same way, I should like to see the United Kingdom opt for the single currency in the very near future.

The shared objective of the fifteen Member States to create a European Union which is ever more closely bound, particularly comprising an area without internal borders, could not be achieved in full without a single currency.

The United Kingdom, as one of the financial capitals of the world, will not be able to claim all the advantages of an ever more integrated European financial market unless it becomes part of it in its own right and takes on all the joint responsibilities and obligations required under Economic and Monetary Union.

There are some Members of Parliament who will vote against my report tomorrow, or who will abstain.

Some are opposed to the euro, as is their right, while others are attempting to make political capital out of the real concerns which our fellow citizens have regarding the dollar-euro exchange rate.

It must be stressed that the euro is a stable currency.

Citizens' purchasing power within the euro zone has remained virtually unchanged since inflation has been, and remains, at a very moderate level.

Of course, the value of the euro has fallen in relation to the dollar and, to a lesser extent, in relation to the yen and the pound.

Such fluctuations are inevitable in a floating exchange rate system.

Even so, the euro has not become a weak currency.

In the last twenty years, the Deutschmark has experienced much more extreme variations in relation to the dollar.

In 1985, the dollar stood at 3.5 DM.

In order to reach such a low level in relation to the dollar, the rate of the euro would have to fall below 0.6 to the dollar.

Some people claim that the financial markets do not value the euro because of Europe' s tardiness in implementing structural reforms.

What structural reforms did Germany undertake after 1985 in order to ensure that the Deutschmark returned to a rate of 1.7 or 1.8 DM to the dollar?

The fact is, the economic position of the European Union is very sound, and is much more favourable than it has been over the last decade.

The only grey area is a rate of unemployment which, although falling, is still excessive.

A return to full employment is certainly not calculated to please the financial markets most of all.

Generally speaking, good news regarding employment makes the stock exchange nervous, as it makes them afraid of a rise in inflation.

Financial markets operate according to their own particular logic.

They look for immediate returns, and currently this is a safer bet in the United States, particularly because of its higher interest rates.

This trend looks set to continue, as the Federal Reserve has just hiked up its interest rates.

With their sheep-like behaviour, however, the markets will ultimately come to realise, Mr President, that, in the medium term, the euro will be a more secure currency than the dollar.

Mr President, on behalf of the Liberal Group I would like to welcome Greece into the euro and say that we shall certainly be voting in favour of Greek membership.

For those other 'out' countries, including my own, I very much hope that they will be able to join the euro soon.

I very much regret too that there are so few British Conservatives here in the Chamber today because it shows, with Greece now the twelfth member of the euro zone, how far from reality British euroscepticism about the future of the currency is.

The euro has successfully delivered low inflation, rising growth, falling unemployment and protection for the euro zone economies from the ups and downs of the foreign exchanges.

Indeed, the British perception of the euro as a failure, because of its fall against the dollar, simply misunderstands the whole project.

The key test of a currency is price stability within the economy, not the value of the currency against other currencies outside the economy.

On the test of internal stability, with inflation at less that 2% and growth higher at 3.1% in the euro zone than in Britain, the euro is clearly succeeding.

Indeed, research at the Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi recently calculated the euro' s value as if it had existed over the last few decades, weighting each predecessor currency's value to create a synthetic euro.

Historically, that research found that the euro actually swooped between a high of USD 1.70 in December 1979 and a low of just USD 0.69 in February 1985.

In other words, the euro could stay within its historic trading range and happily now either fall by a further 23% or rise by 188%.

Certainly that synthetic euro included currencies such as the Italian Lira, but the same point applies even to the mighty German Mark on its own.

If the euro is a weak currency, than the Mark was positively anaemic.

It plunged to DEM 3.45 against the dollar at the end of February 1985, which is a third below its current rate of DEM 2.16 to the dollar.

Within three years, and a dollar crash, the Mark was back to DEM 1.57 during December 1987.

The truth is that the history of foreign exchange is a history of gross misalignments, of overvaluations and undervaluations, each inflicting either depressive pain or inflationary costs on the economy and, as Greece has rightly recognised, the euro is a way of regaining control over a key part of our economic environment.

- (EL) Mr President, the report under discussion contains accurate information and an objective assessment.

Greece is being judged, just as the first countries in EMU were judged, and this judgement accords Greece the position which it deserves, the position which it could have taken up back then, when it could have become a member of EMU along with everyone else, but which it failed to take up because of the weakness of its government.

In all events, this moment is an historic moment for Greece and, may I say, for Europe too.

I hope that we shall see other such historic moments when other countries join and, even more so, when we proceed, as we must, with the policy to complete unification.

The euro restored politics to Europe and it is incumbent upon us to pave the way so that politics in Europe can be institutionalised and globalisation, which is progressing blindly, without any historical or political plan, can be politicised at a later date, through a unified Europe,

For Greece and the other members of EMU, the problem of sustainability is crucial.

The problem of whether or not they will be able to act together on economic policy, as if they had already achieved political unification, is a political problem par excellence.

It is a problem of development choices and changes and, of course, it is a problem of public finance management.

Greece has a tax reform problem.

A large part of the economy pays no taxes and the basic taxes which exist in other Member States do not exist in Greece.

The average Greek taxpayer pays more than other Europeans but total tax revenues in Greece are much lower as a percentage of GDP.

This structural change is pending, while our government is confining itself mainly to privatisation.

Other important structural changes are also pending, such as the need to strengthen regional authorities and their financial independence, reorganise cooperatives in all sectors from the bottom up and liberalise and strengthen the social economy and the third sector.

These are the areas which need to be strengthened immediately if sustainability is to have a future.

Mr President, the European Parliament report on Greece' s adoption of the single currency on 1 January 2001 is remarkable, more by virtue of the political will it expresses to enlarge the euro zone than by its concern for technical exactitude.

It is, however, true that Greece has made considerable efforts in order to meet the Maastricht criteria and has achieved good progress, except in a few areas, such as public debt, but on that subject there are some countries within the euro zone that are doing no better.

These minor failings, which would have had little impact if the euro had been strong, are now liable, against the background of the euro' s depreciation, where the slightest ambiguity serves to detract from the image of the single currency, to have a much more negative effect, for psychological reasons.

Nonetheless, the European institutions did not feel that they should postpone Greece' s accession so as not to give the impression that they had anything to fear and, from that point of view, the position seems perfectly logical, albeit somewhat risky.

The Union for a Europe of Nations Group almost agrees with their conclusions, but as a result of a very different logical argument.

Our initial impulse, obviously, would be to refrain from participating in a debate which a good number of us think is nothing to do with us.

But, on the other hand, we think that extending the euro zone may, in the end, provide the stimulus for beneficial reforms.

The fact is, the more the euro zone is extended, the harder it will be for the single currency to represent nations which are very different, and the more it will be recognised that it would be much simpler to make the system more flexible by having the euro develop into simply a common currency, overlapping with the national currencies with a degree of flexibility but not replacing them.

This solution, of progress towards a shared currency, would probably attract the support of the countries within the European Union which, until now, have remained outside the euro zone, creating a shared point of reference for everyone, and putting an end to the current schism, which is disastrous for the credibility of Europe as a whole.

- (EL) Mr President, the Council' s legislative proposal on the adoption by Greece of the single currency on 1 January 2001 is a positive proposal which responds to the objectives of the European Union to strengthen social and economic cohesion through Economic and Monetary Union.

The New Democracy team within the European People' s Party has always vigorously supported the policies needed so that Greece, which was outside the first round of Member States, could honour the obligations needed in order to join the euro zone.

The truth is that Greece now meets the convergence criteria, with the exception of the public debt criterion.

However, this also applied in the case of Italy and Belgium and Greece should not suffer adverse discrimination in the present case.

In fact, economic development and convergence policies started in Greece at the beginning of the 1990s, as both the Commissioner and the representative of the European Central Bank stressed during the meeting of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, and they concern various governments and various political powers.

However, they are due mainly to the efforts of the Greek people as a whole.

Policies in Greece need to focus today on further structural changes, while maintaining an anti-inflationary line, with the aim of achieving a real social market economy in conditions of healthy competition, so that Greece can keep comfortably to the Dublin Stability and Development Pact.

EMU will be a real success once it succeeds in uniting all the Member States, far more Member States such as Sweden, where convergence is proceeding exceptionally well.

I hope that soon the verdict of the Swedish people will take the completion of the euro zone one step further.

For the time being, we call on the European Parliament to vote in favour of Greece' s accession to the euro zone and we assure you that, as far as we, the main opposition are concerned, we shall use our policies to support the efforts being made to apply the rules of the Stability Pact and to honour joint European obligations within the framework of a unified country without borders.

Mr President, Greece meets the convergence criteria according to the European Commission' s verdict, which is based on a very nominalistic interpretation.

Every self-respecting economist knows that Greece, despite the impressive achievements of the past couple of years, does not yet have inflation and government debt sufficiently under control or in order.

The Greek government has major financial interests in an extensive number of government enterprises which are mostly loss making.

In 2001, the derogation for the liberalisation of various sectors will lapse, at which point the large hidden government debt - half the size of the current one - will become public.

Why did the Commission not take these skeletons in the cupboard into consideration during the assessment?

On 17 January last, the Greek drachma was revalued by 2.5%, mainly to push down inflationary trends.

At the moment, the short-term interest rate in Greece is about 600 basic points above the European Central Bank' s level.

Participation from 1 January 2001 means that the short-term interest rate must come down by the end of this year at the latest.

As a result, the credit facility will expand considerably and Greece will be unable to meet the inflation criterion.

Why does the Commission turn a blind eye to this?

In the interests of the Greek citizens and a more flexible development of the Greek economy, we are forced to decline our support for this Commission proposal.

- (EL) Mr President, I wish to thank the rapporteur for his serious and objective approach to Greece' s candidacy.

I wish to thank him because he dealt with us just as strictly as all the Member States which preceded us in forming the single currency.

This is the biggest compliment which he could give a country which, for a while, gave the impression that its economy was on the slippery slope towards general disintegration.

The world has many examples of where such a slippery slope can lead; however, there are relatively few examples of a country which has found the strength not only to stop but to reverse the decline and manage to satisfy the extremely stringent stability criteria of today' s world.

This success is particularly significant because it was built on the basis of an economy which was not rich and not particularly strong.

We do not need you to remind us that the Greek economy is weak.

For a nation to build monetary stability on such a basis requires greater effort and sacrifice than in a richer economy.

The fact that the Greek people agreed to make these sacrifices is proof positive of their determination to break away once and for all, by their own efforts and taking advantage, of course, of the support of the European Union, from the fate of economic backwardness.

And we shall make the same effort in the future, not because you are strict and we have to, but because it is in our interests to do so.

This effort is dictated by our wish to have a better standard of living, to run a modern economy and to prosper with the rest of Europe.

We are here not because we wanted to conceal our weaknesses, but because we wanted to fight and we fought and we won.

As far as we are concerned, we are a small country, but we are fighters and our accession to the single currency is a vote of confidence in this huge European venture; it is a sign of the fact that we support the European endeavour and we hope that other, far richer countries will see this and follow our example.

No one should rejoice prematurely at the present vicissitudes of the single currency.

In joining, we have shown our trust in Europe, in monetary union, in the prospect of economic unification and in the success of our common economic fate.

That is the meaning of Greece' s accession, that is the meaning of its acceptance.

Europe has become stronger today, not weaker, as the result of Greece' s accession.

Mr President, the Commission' s and the ECB' s convergence report deals not only with the Greek, but also with the Swedish, convergence programme.

So too does Mr Goebbels' report, even if the part about Sweden is limited.

The Swedish economy is doing well - very well.

Mr Goebbels also points this out.

In common with Mr Karas and Mrs Randzio-Plath, he also issues a reminder that the EU would be that much stronger if all the Member States were to participate in EMU.

This is a timely reminder of something which is self-evidently the case.

If one is going to join the EU, one should not do so by halves.

Even if the economies of Great Britain, Denmark and Sweden are going well, it must be clearly pointed out, as it was by Commissioner Solbes Mira in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, that, if the spirit of the Treaty is to be complied with, no Member State can, in the long term, place itself outside so strategic an area of cooperation as the common currency.

This could have been brought out more clearly in the report.

The euro has provided greater stability.

This has benefited companies, especially small companies.

Price competition has increased, and there has been greater transparency.

The euro is not weak. Instead, it is the dollar which is extremely strong.

Allow me to remind those countries outside the euro zone that there is a danger of their influence declining further.

Last week, we learned that France' s prime minister wants to see a Euro 11 - soon a Euro 12 - with more influence and power when it comes to economic and financial policy.

At present, the economy is on the way up in Europe, but the clouds are gathering - in the United States and in Europe.

You do not buy an umbrella once it has begun to rain. Instead, you buy an umbrella when the sun is shining so that you are prepared for when the rain comes.

The euro provides Europe with economic stability and competitiveness.

There are very strong economic and moral reasons why Sweden should join EMU.

Sweden should also have an obligation to help increase Europe' s economic competitiveness.

I should therefore have liked to have seen my home country, Sweden, being able to join with Greece today.

- (EL) Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, our reservations about Greece' s accession to EMU are not a matter of principle; they are based on actual facts, as regards both EMU in general and the Greek economy.

As far as EMU in general is concerned, we are in favour of real economic and monetary union.

Unfortunately, this union is only monetary, not economic.

We know that EMU was created prematurely for political reasons which date back to the events of 1989 and 1990, which is why the child, the euro, has been delivered early and is languishing in an incubator.

This is the opinion expressed by the Nobel prize-winning economists Friedman, Tobin and Modigliani.

The creation of EMU was not preceded by an agreement on the economic policy which the Member States had to follow.

Only now are the Commission and Council trying to outline common policies for certain economic problems such as unemployment and competitiveness.

But the road is long and full of adventures, as the poet says.

The Goebbels report tells us that Parliament' s reply cannot but be a political one and assures us that Greece' s accession to the euro zone does not involve any political risk.

However, the report adds that there are economic risks and that they are greater in the case of Greece than in the case of other countries belonging to the euro zone.

There is no danger to the economies of the other 14 Member States.

Of course, I have trouble understanding how anyone can distinguish so easily between political and economic risks, but we shall let that pass.

As far as Greece is concerned, our reservations concern the economic risks mentioned in the report.

The sole aim of the economic policy pursued by Greece over recent years has been to satisfy the convergence criteria.

Efforts have focused on improving indicators, not real economic quantities.

The competitiveness of the economy has not improved and unemployment continues to rise. The structural changes needed have not been carried out and privatisation has been presented as the new panacea for development and prosperity.

Wage differentials have been sacrificed to indicators and are increasing, and, as a result, the figures are doing well while the people are suffering, however.

In all honesty, the Goebbels report says that, as regards convergence, all EU governments are required to produce results but are free to choose the means of achieving it.

It is therefore the Greek government' s choice of means which we object to.

The means chosen were neither economically suitable nor socially just.

The rich got richer and the poor got poorer.

In joining EMU, we are jumping in at the deep end and hoping for the best.

Mr President, firstly my congratulations to Mr Goebbels on a very professional report and an excellent presentation.

Some government finances are indispensable prerequisites for economic stability and economic progress.

Securing budgetary discipline strengthens price stability and creates conditions which are conducive to creating much needed employment within the territories of the Union.

The Stability and Growth Pact States provide the 15 Member States of the Union with a comprehensive surveillance procedure to monitor their budgetary policies.

The Stability and Growth Pact calls for Member States to reach, in the medium term, a budgetary position close to balance or in surplus.

It must also identify the adjustment pacts adopted to reduce the general government debt ratios.

The Commission and Parliament monitor submissions made by each Member State of the Union to ensure compliance with the Stability and Growth Pact.

We must also remember that there are wider provisions for closer coordination of economic policies in general between the Member States of the Union.

The principle of the Stability and Growth Pact is also a logical progression from the criteria laid down in Maastricht for the Member States to comply with economic conditions for participation within the new European single currency.

The one comment I would like to make about the state of the single European currency is: Why do so many Member States want to join such a regime?

It is clear that Greece will shortly join the existing 11 Member States who are participating in the economic and monetary union, and I wish to congratulate Greece on its economic recovery and wish it well in the future.

I welcome Greece into the euro zone.

It is also clear that Sweden and Denmark will accede to the single European currency regime over the next couple of years.

It is known that the vast majority of countries from eastern and central Europe want to sign up to the process of economic and monetary union in as short a time as possible, but I believe that the European Central Bank has to outline a clear strategy as to how it intends to bolster the value of the new euro.

The 290 million citizens within the existing 11 EMU countries have the right to know what the European Central Bank intends to do to maintain and enhance the value of the euro now and into the future.

We shall adjourn the debate on Mr Goebbels' s report, which will resume at 3 p.m. today, as we are now going to start the voting, which will run from 11.30 a.m. to noon.

It will be adjourned for a formal sitting and will resume immediately after the formal sitting.

I therefore urge the Members not to leave the Chamber at the end of the formal sitting.

As regards the report by the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs on the proposal for a Council framework decision on combating fraud and counterfeiting of non-cash means of payment, currently scheduled for Thursday 18 May, the rapporteur, Mr Gerhard Schmid, has just noted that the text which is to be submitted to the Council on 29 May is substantially different from the text submitted to Parliament, on which the report in question was based. This means that Parliament must be consulted afresh.

In order to avoid debating the subject twice over, the rapporteur wishes to wait until the Council' s recommendation has been updated in order to draw up a new text.

The Socialist Group has therefore asked that this matter be referred to committee and that the item be removed from the agenda for next Thursday.

(Parliament gave its assent) I must inform you that due to the late submission of the report by Mrs Buitenweg, on behalf of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, on the equal treatment of persons irrespective of racial or ethnic origin, this report was not available in French, Spanish or Swedish for the meetings of the political groups last night. I therefore propose that we keep the debate on the report on the agenda as it currently stands, as the first item on Thursday 18 May, but that we defer the vote on the report until the next part-session.

Madam President, it would be much more coherent and in keeping with our Rules of Procedure if we voted, as long as we hold the debate, on Thursday evening or Friday morning.

Mr Barón Crespo, the problem is that the text is still not available in French, Spanish and Swedish, thus presenting a problem in terms of our Rules of Procedure.

That is why the Bureau proposed this solution.

Madam President, I respect what the Presidency has said, but I have different information: that this morning all the versions are available.

I accept the President' s words, but I must point out that there is some inconsistency here.

Mr Barón Crespo, I quite understand your objection.

I am informed by our services that the other reason for making this proposal was related to the limited time the groups have to table amendments.

Having said that, following your request, I suggest that we put to the House the sense of the proposal which I have just made.

Perhaps Mrs Buitenweg can give us her opinion, as rapporteur?

Madam President, I would very much regret it if my report were to be taken off the agenda and if the vote were not to take place this week.

We have an agreement with all political groups in this Parliament that we would accelerate proceedings for this directive.

This is necessary to put through this directive swiftly and within the time in which the Portuguese Presidency, which has shown exceptional commitment in this respect, is in office.

The Council will be convening before our next plenary sitting.

This means that if we do not adopt a resolution here, the Council will be unable to adopt its position either, and everything will be shelved long term.

I would like to point out that the group which has the most problems and seizes upon administrative issues as an excuse to postpone dealing with these, is also the group which voted against this report in the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs.

I therefore do not rule out other motives which might be at play here.

This has a bearing on the speed at which anti-discrimination can be translated into legislation in Europe and at which people can therefore be protected from racial or ethnic discrimination, and I do not appreciate the fact that Parliament is arguing in favour of postponing this protection.

Ladies and gentlemen, I appreciate the importance of this discussion, but I propose entering the debate on the agenda for tomorrow, as the Bureau wished.

I suggest that the Conference of Presidents or, at any event, the groups, should come to some agreement on the procedure to be adopted regarding voting after the debate, and that our final decision on the timing of the vote should be postponed until tomorrow.

May I take it that the various group presidents and Members of Parliament agree in principle, as I am afraid that if I give the floor to every Member who requests it we shall be starting the whole debate up again?

Mr President, as you know, I am the co-rapporteur with Mrs Buitenweg on this important directive on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs.

I hope that you will rule that the vote, as per our agenda agreed on Monday, will go ahead and I have two points to make to our colleagues in the PPE in that respect.

The first is this: since this directive was first proposed, the whole furore across the European Union because of events in Austria and elsewhere, where the extreme right has come forward, has caused us, as a Parliament, with the widest possible across-party support, to work with the Council and the Commission to agree an accelerated timetable to enable this directive to go through to provide the strongest possible response to the racist and extremist threats that undermine our combined values.

That deal with the Council and with the Portuguese Presidency said that we would agree in this Parliament this week prior to the Council of Ministers' meeting in June.

If we fail to meet that commitment, what does that say to the racists?

And my second point: we talk about the dignity of Parliament.

What about the dignity of black and ethnic minority people subject to racial harassment, victimisation and discrimination?

Ladies and gentlemen, I should like to make things quite clear.

The debate is indeed going to take place as scheduled on the agenda and, like everyone in the House, I appreciate its importance.

Nonetheless, I suggest that you accept my proposal, which is this: that the debate should take place as scheduled on the agenda and, tomorrow, the sovereign Assembly, after consulting the groups, shall decide whether or not to vote on this report during the present part-session.

I think it would not be right to vote on it immediately.

Madam President, I do not see why the Conference of Presidents should make the decision.

Surely it is up to all of us here at the plenary sitting to decide whether or not the vote should take place during this part-session, not the Conference of Presidents?

We wish to decide right here, either today or tomorrow, whether the vote on this directive and this report should take place this week. We do not wish to leave the decision to the Conference of Presidents.

Mr Cohn-Bendit, I think you have not been listening to my suggestions carefully enough.

I did not suggest that the decision was referred to the Conference of Presidents, which does not have the authority to decide.

I suggested reconciling points of view within the groups and then tomorrow, in the House, discussing the timeliness of voting this week.

It goes without saying that only the plenary assembly has the right to make this decision.

I should now like to put an end to any further speeches on the subject, as I am afraid that discussing the matter ad infinitum is not going to lead to a clear decision.

I shall just give the floor to Mrs Ludford, whose group has not yet had an opportunity to comment.

Madam President, I just wish to emphasise on behalf of the Liberal Group the desirability of debating and voting this report this week.

Despite the short timetable for the consideration of this matter, it has been dealt with very fully in the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs and there has been every opportunity for amendments to be tabled.

It is regrettable that there have been administrative delays in producing all the language versions.

However, I feel that there is a touch of opportunism in the PPE Group' s objections to a vote this week.

After all, if it were technically impossible, the services would never have proposed that it be voted on tomorrow.

Therefore, we should debate and vote on it tomorrow; otherwise there is a danger of obstruction by one group.

Ladies and gentlemen, I put it to you that we decide as follows: we shall carry on the debate as scheduled on the agenda and tomorrow, the House will consider whether the vote should be retained as scheduled, after consultation with the various groups.

Mrs Muscardini, I suppose you wanted to speak on the next item, but, quite frankly, I would urge you not to take the floor.

I cannot deprive you of your freedom of speech, however, but I do appeal to your sense of responsibility.

Madam President, my responsibility is that I have worked in this Parliament for 11 years and I have seen it deteriorate with every passing day.

I will not go back to the previous debate although I had requested the floor in order to speak on the previous matter.

I am afraid that this is not the first time that the Presidency has ignored this area of the Chamber and so I am going to speak on the House' s agenda.

Would the Presidency please organise the Secretariat and herself in such a way as to accord all Members the same right to speak on the matters over which they wish to take the floor.

It is deplorable to talk of democracy and human rights and then not give Members the right to read the texts in their own language or to speak in the Chamber.

on the appointment of senior Commission officials

Common position adopted by the Council with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council directive on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the front underrun protection of motor vehicles and amending Council Directive 70/156/EEC (5378/1/2000 - C5-0179/2000 - 1999/0007(COD)) (Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market)

(The President declared the common position approved)

- Proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive amending Council Directive 70/220/EEC concerning measures to be taken against air pollution by emissions from motor vehicles (COM(2000)42 - C5-0091/2000 - 2000/0040(COD)) (Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy)

Report without debate (A5-0120/2000) by Mrs Jackson, on behalf of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, on the proposal for a Council decision concerning the conclusion, on behalf of the Community, of the new Convention for the Protection of the Rhine (COM(2000)61 - C5-0168/2000 - 2000/0037(CNS))

Report (A5-0128/2000) by Mrs González Álvarez, on behalf of the European Parliament delegation to the Conciliation Committee, on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council decision establishing a scheme to monitor the average specific emissions of CO2 from new passenger cars (C5-0105/2000) - 1998/0202(COD))

Report (A5-0129/2000) by Mrs Smet, on behalf of the European Parliament delegation to the Conciliation Committee, on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council directive amending Council Directive 93/104/EC concerning certain aspects of the organisation of working time to cover sectors and activities excluded from that directive (C5-0183/2000 - 1998/0318(COD))

(The sitting was adjourned at 11.55 a.m. for the formal sitting and resumed at 12.30 p.m.)

Report (A5-0117/2000) by Mrs Roth-Behrendt, on behalf of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation laying down rules for the prevention and control of certain transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (COM(1998) 623 - C4-0025/1999 - 1998/0323(COD))

Report (A5-0113/2000) by Mr Savary, on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism, on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive on the interoperability of the trans-European conventional rail system (COM(1999) 617 - C5-0301/1999 - 1999/0252(COD))

Report (A5-0112/2000) by Mr Savary, on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism, on the Report from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament on the implementation and effects of Directive 96/48/EC concerning the interoperability of the trans-European high-speed rail system (COM(1999)414 - C5-0207/1999 - 1999/2165(COS))

EXPLANATIONS OF VOTE- González Álvarez report (A5-0128/2000)

Madam President, I voted for the González Álvarez measure on the regulation on the monitoring of carbon dioxide emissions from new passenger cars.

Why am I in favour of this measure?

It goes without saying that I support the monitoring of new passenger cars when they are first placed on the market, but my vote in favour of the motion also contains a call to make greater efforts in the monitoring of second-hand cars, for, in actual fact, I would argue that new cars are never to be found on the road due to the fact that the very act of driving them along a road ages them by definition.

It is, above all, 'old' cars, the cars which have been in use for a number of years, which cause atmospheric pollution.

I call for monitoring of these 'old' cars, to ensure that they are always in a state of good health and to prevent them from harming the earth' s atmosphere.

I therefore support the use and preservation of pensioner cars as well.

- (FR) The González Álvarez report deals with reducing CO2 emissions, a necessary goal, particularly with the fight against global warming at stake.

An objective like this would require Europe to provide itself with effective resources in order to limit such emissions, either by binding standards, as is the case for other pollutants, or by incentives, with checks and penalties.

Furthermore, the increase in the number of vehicles plays a major part in the increase in CO2 emissions.

This aspect of the problem must be tackled as well, by implementing a transport development policy involving rail and waterway transport, combined transport, and public service which is capable of offering an effective alternative to the private car.

According to the explanatory statement, the Commission is still at the stage of a 'monitoring scheme' , i.e. collating statistics but without undertaking effective checks, and, apparently, excluding light commercial vehicles (vans) and heavy commercial vehicles (trucks).

It is better than nothing, but not much!

Despite its limitations, we nonetheless voted in favour of the González Álvarez report.

Madam President, I voted for the report on the conciliation process concerning the organisation of working time, first and foremost in support of the article on doctors in training.

It is, in effect, appropriate for them to be able to rest in-between operations, particularly during their training period, also in consideration of the fact that, during the rest of their careers, it is above all - not exclusively, but for the most part - the elderly who will fall victim to their scalpels.

The doctors will need to have learnt their trade well, free from considerations of working time.

Above all, however, my vote for the motion is an invitation to consider reducing not just the working time in a worker' s day but the time he spends working over his entire lifetime.

It would, in fact, be appropriate for a person not to have to work for 80 years if he is going to live to be 90 years of age, but to work for a period of 30 years if he is going to live to be 60 or 70.

Madam President, I voted for the amendment of the directive on working times because this directive has been extended to include certain categories which had not been covered.

I refer, in particular, to categories of the transport sector.

Furthermore, I hope that the approval of this directive will prompt a decision, at last, to approve the regulations on flight times and working times for pilots and cabin crew.

This is not solely a social matter of worker protection - although it does include this factor - but it is also a question of flight safety.

(EL) It is a fact that man' s strength and capabilities are limited.

Working times may be harmful to the physical and the mental health of both individuals and families, which is why working times need to be organised so that the safety and health of workers are not put at risk.

However, 7 million workers in the EU, in transport and fisheries and doctors in training are exempted from Directive 104/93/ÅC on the organisation of working time.

This intolerable situation and the abuse of workers in the above specialist sectors as regards their working times is of a nature and is taking on dimensions which are such that rules must be imposed without delay, given that workers such as doctors in training in Great Britain work up to 72 hours a week.

Extending the directive is essential, but it is not enough.

The provisions proposed will be unable to protect the safety and health of workers effectively, given that there are still numerous exemptions and long transitional periods for implementing the directive.

We must also bear in mind that the original directive did not stipulate the length of a working day (it stipulated a working week of 48 hours - an implied violation of the measure).

- (NL) My Group eventually accepted the compromise reached by the Conciliation Committee to apply the working time directive to the excluded sectors.

It is now crucial that these sectors can, at long last, look forward to a regulation so that they too come under the scope of the directive.

We struggle greatly with the long transitional periods for the junior doctors sector.

After the directive enters into force, the Member States have a total of nine years before they are obliged to have transposed the directive into national legislation.

Under certain conditions, this period can be extended by another two or three years.

Needless to say, we feel for the many Member States which struggle with inadequate staffing levels in their health sector.

However, the Member States have known for a long time that they will need to adapt to the working times directive in the long run.

It looks very much like this serious problem has been shelved, as a result of which, in our opinion, the arguments used to support the long transitional periods do not so much signify powerlessness as unwillingness.

In the light of the above, when this directive and the ensuing national legislation is implemented, close monitoring will be required to ensure that the weekly working hours for junior doctors meet the statutory standards.

- (FR) I can only recommend that this text be adopted, which is the product of a long and difficult conciliation process between the Council, the Commission and Parliament.

This favourable vote is of capital importance as it concerns the health and safety of some 7 million workers in Europe.

Workers in the transport sector and offshore workers, sea fishermen and doctors in training will at last be entitled to benefit from European working hours regulations.

As a French member of the Parliament' s Committee on Employment and Social Affairs, at second reading, I supported Parliament' s position which, in particular, provided for a four-year transition period for doctors in training, with a maximum working week of 54 hours, over a four month reference period.

The conciliation process produced an agreement whereby doctors in training will be covered by the directive, as far as its scope of application - a maximum 48-hour working week over a four-month reference period - is concerned, after a period of nine years.

The nine-year period is to be subdivided as follows: a four-year transposition period and a five-year transition period.

In the first three years of the transition period, the number of weekly working hours shall not exceed 58, or 56 during the last two years.

For some States, however, this sort of nine-year period will not be sufficient to carry out the necessary adjustments.

These States may therefore be permitted an additional period of two years.

The Commission will make a statement on the notification of the relevant Member State, after consulting employers and workers at European level, as well as representatives of the Member States.

The notification, the opinion of the Commission and, if this opinion is not acted upon, the Member State' s justification, shall be published in the OJ and sent to the European Parliament.

If there are specific problems, then the two-year period may be extended for a further year, but the Member State must incorporate the procedure in full.

The maximum number of weekly working hours may not then exceed 52.

(PT) I have voted against this report because, as a doctor by profession, I think that the excessive working hours that it proposes for junior doctors are unacceptable.

- (FR) The text before you, after years of negotiations seeking to define the maximum limits for weekly working hours, is symbolic in more ways than one of the ambiguities and inadequacies of European social policy.

Firstly, as regards the very principle of a European social policy, the Treaty of Maastricht restricts this to minimum social standards, and only on condition that they do not "hold back small- and medium-sized undertakings" .

These restrictions are no longer acceptable today.

That, then, is one urgent question to be raised for the forthcoming revision of the Treaty.

Ambiguities and inadequacies are, however, just as evident in the proposal before us.

Are we sufficiently aware that, in 1994, when the Member States came to an agreement on the maximum 48-hour working week, they excluded several million workers, such as transport workers, offshore oil rig workers or junior doctors in training?

Mrs Smet' s proposal extends the general rule of 48 hours to some of these sectors.

It still does not, however, settle the matter of long-distance road haulage workers and puts forward a frankly ridiculous timescale for implementing the directive with regard to junior doctors!

The position of these doctors in training is similar in many countries: working weeks of 70 and 80 hours in conditions that are occasionally disgraceful and sometimes dangerous to patients.

The recent strike by junior doctors in France showed that such a situation was not acceptable, either for the doctors, the patients or the public health service.

But, even though, last November, the European Parliament proposed almost unanimously that the 48-hour rule should come into force within four years, it is now suggested that we alter our position radically. We should adopt the joint proposal of the ministers and the parliamentary delegation allowing Member States up to twelve years (!) before they apply the 48-hour week directive to doctors in training.

Please think about what this means exactly. The first doctors in training to benefit from these conditions have just started secondary school!

I do not know of a single other area - the euro, the free movement of persons, goods or capital - where a timescale of this order is tolerated.

In such circumstances, how can we expect the European Union' s social policy to be taken seriously?

Especially as the proposal divides this twelve year period into several distinct periods, each with their own rules for the maximum working week:

until 2004 there will be no change, there will be no restrictions on working hours;

between 2004 and 2007 the maximum working week will be 58 hours;

between 2007 and 2009 it will be 56 hours;

between 2009 and 2012 it will be 52 hours.

In adopting this text we are sending out a worrying message.

This is the first directive on social matters to be adopted since the Lisbon Summit on employment. I would like to express the hope that the Commission, Parliament and the Council will, at last, take European social policy more seriously.

Social Europe will not make progress, nor will it convince our countries' citizens with proposals such as this.

Madam President, I voted for the Roth-Behrendt report, although, as before, my vote in favour of the motion is also a call for improvement of European legislation in the field of the implementation of the precautionary principle.

It is, of course, right for us to consider our health as human beings and to slaughter the huge number of animals at risk; it is right for us to adopt this measure and thereby establish rules to bring farmers and stock breeders into line, but we also need to keep our feet firmly on the ground.

What I mean is, right now, I can imagine farmers running along behind their cows - Daisy or Buttercup, maybe - and fussing over feeding them hay, fodder and products from their fields, whereas they may well not have had time to have their animal' s health checked.

So let us combine practical action with a desire for improvement.

- (FR) I should like to express my satisfaction with the content of this report.

Let me remind you that in presenting this proposal for a regulation, the Commission is fulfilling the undertaking it gave in 1997 to the European Parliament' s Temporary Committee of Inquiry to put forward measures for effectively monitoring transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (TSEs).

This proposal seeks to create a standard legal basis for the monitoring and prevention of TSEs, of whatever type, and for all animal-based products.

It incorporates all Community regulations in force in the field of TSEs.

Like the rapporteur, I endorse the general strategy adopted by the European Commission, but I think the text before us needs tightening up in order to guarantee maximum consumer safety.

I have therefore supported the amendments tabled by the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy.

These amendments were intended to introduce the possibility of systematically implementing rapid diagnostic tests, and to reintroduce the European Parliament' s request in the context of the follow-up to the recommendations on BSE, i.e. withdrawing the entire herd from the food chain, banning any movement of animals defined as at risk, and advocating the slaughter and destruction of such animals, with the exception of animals intended for scientific research.

The proposal also had to be extended by inviting the Commission to present proposals for the inclusion of some cosmetic products and medicines, and to draw up a procedure for determining the epidemiological status of countries or regions in relation to BSE, i.e. a classification of countries according to contamination levels.

I shall conclude by stressing the fact that the European Parliament must continue to be involved, under the codecision procedure, in fundamental decisions on the prevention of TSEs.

- (FR) The problem under discussion this morning was first identified a long time ago.

It is all very laudable to attempt to prevent the risks of BSE at Community level today, but it was almost 15 years ago that our researchers clearly established that one of the causes of mad cow disease was the consumption of cattle fodder containing animal-based meal made from ingredients taken from the carcasses of sheep suffering from ovine scrapie.

This is why, when we contributed towards setting up the Parliament' s Temporary Committee of Inquiry into BSE, we pointed out most forcefully that any regulatory instrument should necessarily cover all transmissible spongiform encephalopathies.

Why has it been necessary to wait so long to effect the necessary changes in the regulations?

Why is there this time lag between scientific discoveries and Community proposals?

Fortunately, as far as the protection of the citizens is concerned, reactions at national level and in a number of Member States were rather more rapid and effective, compared with the incredible slowness and the usual paradoxes of Community bureaucracy.

Let me remind you that some countries, in effect, in order to ensure consumer food safety, have had to deliberately contravene Community regulations.

It is a perfectly good idea to make the use of rapid diagnostic tests more widespread.

They will be a significant component of BSE monitoring at Community level.

Let us not, however, treat them like a universal panacea. These tests can only detect the affected prion protein above a certain level.

They are therefore no substitute for, in particular, the withdrawal of specific high-risk materials.

Above all, it would be an outrage if Member States which have set up a screening programme based on tests far stricter than the Community programme were to be penalised, in terms of classification with regard to BSE-related risks, in comparison with States which have confined themselves to the minimum Community programme.

Community regulations should never represent a brake on, or obstacle to, the action of Member States that wish to offer their citizens more stringent protection.

It has been clear since the start of the BSE crisis that the most appropriate and effective level of protection for our citizens is directly linked to the vigilance of the national authorities, with Community procedures, when they finally come to be drawn up, being able, of course, to play a useful complementary role.

Madam President, I should briefly like to pay tribute to the work done by our fellow Member, Mr Savary, who has once again shown himself to be a staunch defender of the railways and of public services. Next I should like to tell the people who voted in favour of this report that I, of course, agreed with saying that it is no longer possible to accept the share of rail transport increasingly losing out to road transport, and that nor is it possible to accept the technical, and even regulatory, obstacles from a bygone age that stand in the way of the much-needed freedom of movement throughout the whole of Europe?

All the same, for future reference, I wish to state today that making this observation and supporting this determination to make progress must not lead to untrammelled liberalisation and privatisation, as this puts our safety at risk, and we can see many examples of this today in some countries of Europe, and it is destructive as far as our public service is concerned.

This is not the purpose of today' s report but, in view of debates we will have in future, I wished to state this publicly.

Madam President, although we are in favour of completely harmonising European rail networks and making them compatible, since this is a necessity, and although we are in favour of developing this type of public transport, both on major international routes as well as on regional and local networks, we abstained from the vote on this report, since nowhere did it mention the need to operate rail networks as a public service, i.e. as a system designed and put into practice in order to respond to the needs of users and not to be a source of profit for private companies.

Madam President, I voted for the measure contained within the Savary report, on the trans-European conventional rail system.

This is a clearly a matter in which the European Union must intervene on account of the subsidiarity principle.

Long-distance transport can only be regulated at European level.

Nevertheless, there was room for improvement in this measure, but I hope that this will be achieved over the next few years.

We should use this as a springboard to create, at last, a European department of transport links, but, first and foremost, we should make it easier for pensioners and the elderly to travel between the European capitals. Pensioners love to travel and could have the right to a free travel card for journeys between their capital city or their own town and the capital cities of the other 14 European States.

We must give our support to the interoperability of European railways as a means of revitalising and developing the sector at international level, in order better to meet users' needs, and also as an instrument for protecting the environment.

Nevertheless, we do not feel that adequate solutions to the problems arising for those working in the sector as a result of this process have been provided in the texts before us.

We are also aware, and are therefore bound to express our concern about this, that the proposals currently being discussed are part of a package of measures designed to liberalise the sector, and that the experiments that have already been carried out in this area have certainly led to a deterioration in safety and social conditions for workers.

Madam President, I voted for the second Savary report, which differs from the previous report in that it refers to a trans-European high-speed rail system.

My point, this time, is that there is also room for improvement in this high-speed European transport system, in that it should be designed for use by ordinary citizens as well as businessmen who want to travel from Madrid to Copenhagen or somewhere even further away in as short a time as possible: businessmen can always go by plane.

High-speed links must, first and foremost, be designed for tourism, leisure and the enjoyment of all European citizens, especially the elderly, who would be avid travellers if conditions were more luxurious and rail travel a more pleasurable experience.

- I voted against the report on the trans-European high-speed system (A5-0112/2000).

It is most enlightening to compare the two reports presented by our colleague, Mr Savary, even if these documents have different legal bases.

The high-speed sector and the conventional rail system respond to quite different philosophies.

The former report received unanimous support in the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism.

Only half of the Members of the very same committee voted for the latter.

This fact is, in itself, expressive enough.

On the high-speed rail system report the Environment Committee, astonishingly, did not deliver any opinion, even if the environmental aspects are not mentioned in it at all.

It seems that most people in this House do not really care about the need to rebalance the different modes of transport in favour of the railways, to reach a significant rise in the volume of goods and passengers that nowadays overwhelmingly use the roads.

- (FR) First of all I should like to congratulate the rapporteur on his excellent work on the Commission' s report on the implementation and effects of Directive 96/48/EC concerning the interoperability of the trans-European high-speed rail system.

Creating the technical conditions for the interoperability of the European railway networks involves harmonising, between the various networks, the many different systems and components involved in rail transport.

The objective is a threefold one: to gradually create the conditions for the uninterrupted movement of trains on the 15 national networks - the free movement objective; to eliminate current high costs and delays in order to improve the competitiveness and reliability of the railways vis-à-vis their competitors - the sustainable mobility objective; and to create the conditions for a single European market in railway rolling stock by harmonising the elements that make up the railways - the economic and technological objective.

The objective of the directive before us today was to publish the technical specifications for interoperability (TSIs) for six sub-systems - Maintenance, Infrastructure, Energy, Rolling Stock, Operation and Control-Command - beginning the work of standardising components in collaboration with CEN, Cenelec and ETSI, and establishing in each Member State a list of notified bodies instructed to assess the conformity of the components produced by the relevant industries.

This report, drawn up pursuant to Directive 96/48/CE, gives an initial assessment of the progress made.

It must be noted that four years after the directive was adopted, not one single technical specification for interoperability (TSI) has been drawn up even though interoperability is deemed to be fundamental to the mobility of persons and the effectiveness of trans-European rail systems.

The majority of Member States have not, to date, transposed the provisions of this directive into their national legislation.

We are a long way from debating the priority to be given to rail!

It would, however, be unfair to say that no progress has been made.

For one thing, a tripartite body, the EARI (European Association for Railway Interoperability), has been set up and has undertaken the work of identifying and specifying existing technologies, components and procedures, which should culminate in two TSIs in the near future.

Moreover, the latest high-speed network investment projects, designed along the lines of Thalys, have, for the first time, made efforts to achieve convergence and technical coherence.

Even so, these achievements are still inadequate in terms of the issues at stake.

National disparities are a considerable obstacle to the development of rail transport in Europe, in spite of the many advantages of this means of transport in terms of sustainable development, pollution and safety.

The figures speak for themselves: in 1970, the railways had a 21% share of the goods transport market; today they have only 8.5%.

The trend is the same for passengers, where the market share has dropped from 10% in 1970 to 6%.

Where freight is concerned, the railways could quite easily disappear altogether from large areas of the goods transport market.

There is no doubt that the closure of large parts of the European network would lead to significant job losses.

It is therefore essential to give a fresh boost to interoperability.

(The sitting was suspended at 1.20 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m.)

Adoption of single currency by Greece (continuation)

The next item is the continuation of the debate on the report (A5­0135/2000) by Mr Goebbels, on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Social Affairs, on the proposal for a Council decision pursuant to Article 122(2) of the EC Treaty for the adoption of the single currency by Greece on 1.1.2001.

Mr President, allow me first of all to congratulate Greece on its extraordinary economic progress.

The Commission has now concluded that Greece fulfils all the convergence criteria.

I am convinced that Parliament will take the same view.

It is quite an achievement to meet the convergence requirements and, at the same time, as Greece is doing now, to achieve increases in growth and employment.

Europe, especially the remaining convergence countries - Sweden and Greece - are now showing that it is fully possible to fulfil the stability requirements of the convergence process and still maintain a dynamic economy with growth and falling unemployment.

Against that background, I have no reservations about recommending that Greece join the euro zone as from 2001.

Sweden, too, fulfils the basic economic requirements.

The Swedish economy is now one of Europe' s strongest, with low inflation, high growth and a balance of payments surplus.

However, Sweden still does not fulfil all of the more formal requirements.

It has not joined the Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM) and Swedish legislation concerning the Bank of Sweden still does not completely fulfil the requirements of the Treaty.

However, the Swedish Parliament has instituted a number of changes to the legislation concerning monetary policy in order to facilitate Sweden joining the euro.

The remaining changes will be made when Sweden actually applies to join the euro, partly by applying to join the ERM.

I am very well aware of the implications of the Treaty.

But in a Euro-sceptic country like Sweden, which still feels itself to be a new Member State, there is a democratic imperative for a change as major as that of joining the euro to be preceded by a careful democratic process.

At the Committee hearing, Commissioner Solbes declared that it is the individual country which applies to enter the ERM.

Where Sweden' s entry is concerned, it is therefore my and, as I understand it, the Commission' s judgement that to want full status in EMU by entering the ERM is to adopt a political position.

Commissioner Solbes said in the Committee that he respects the Swedish government' s desire to allow the people to decide the question in a referendum.

We are therefore also grateful for the phrases in Mr Goebbels' report in which he welcomes this democratic process.

I, who am working hard in favour of Swedish 'euro membership' , am convinced that, in a few years' time, we shall also make the same decision for Sweden as we are now making in the case of Greece, i.e. to welcome and approve Sweden as a fully-fledged member of the Economic and Monetary Union and of the single currency.

I look forward to that day.

Mr President, I would like to make a brief comment concerning Sweden.

Sweden joined the European Union without an opt-out, certainly not in respect of monetary union.

Only on points such as legislation, which is in Sweden' s remit, does the country not meet the criteria.

There is talk of a referendum coming up.

I would like to know when exactly that will be as I am sure there is not a date for this yet.

How long will it be before the Commission does its duty and reminds Sweden' s Social Democratic government of its signature under a very important contract?

The Swedish government sets an extremely bad example for the candidate countries which are, at this moment, waiting to join.

Mr President, I would now like to move on to Greece.

I have a problem with that country.

The Greeks have produced a fantastic achievement.

I only wonder how long the effects of that achievement will last.

But I am acutely aware that by punishing Greece for achieving something positive, we will let the actual guilty party off the hook.

Greece probably does not meet the criteria any more or less than other countries did.

The euro zone should be able to carry a relatively small economy such as the Greek one quite easily.

At the moment, however, this sends out the wrong psychological message to the markets and citizens who, to use an appropriate metaphor, look upon the euro descending Mount Olympus with sadness in their eyes.

This is why Parliament, on behalf of the citizen, has to send out a signal to the Union' s large Member States.

But the Central Bank, for example, is not concerned with the euro' s external value.

The true culprits are the governments of Germany, France, Belgium and especially Italy.

These countries, however, are making a mess of their own responsibilities vis-à-vis the currency and vis-à-vis the European citizen, let alone their own citizens.

They do not introduce the required structural reform within their own markets.

Governments are far too accommodating when agreements are not met, under the motto: you meet the agreements today, I might meet them tomorrow.

Why is Italy not called to task when it makes a shambles of its good intentions?

The large Member States and Belgium are trifling with the interests of all European citizens.

It is said time and again that the European citizens are not adversely affected as long as they stay in Europe.

But surely, Mr President, we should not make that decision for them?

In the Netherlands, many farmers are emigrating to North America.

A weak euro lets them down badly.

Businesses within the European Union have become 25% cheaper for the United States to buy.

I think it is time for some changes.

I will be abstaining from the votes today.

Mr President, I am wholly and unequivocally in favour of Greece' s adoption of the single European currency, the euro.

As Mr Goebbels stated in his report, the European Parliament' s task is not to assess practical adherence to the Maastricht criteria, for that has already been done, item by item, by the Commission and the bodies whose task it is to monitor these indicators and keep us informed.

The European Parliament must express a political opinion; it must speak from the heart and not on the basis of figures; it must listen to its soul instead of numbers.

What sort of European Union is it in which one of the 15 States, which wishes to accede to the most committed and most important level of European cohesion, is still left standing outside the door?

When, as the report maintains, we consider that all the Maastricht criteria are fulfilled and that, in addition, this country is called Greece - an enchanting name in itself - we cannot fail to realise that this cannot continue and be moved to remedy the situation.

And I refer, in particular, to the Greek pensioners.

You may wonder why, as representative of the Italian Pensioners' Party, I am interested in Greek pensioners.

But Mr President, if we have to ask Greece to reduce its State deficit - and, unfortunately, we know that, nowadays, this is only achieved by reducing pensions - instead of avoiding wastage - which, as the previous speaker said, in socialist governments, especially, is due to poor budgetary allocations - we must not make the pensioners and elderly citizens of Greece pay the price for its accession to the European currency.

Mr President, the euro was born two years ago.

For me, as a Europhile, it was a great day when monetary union was brought to a successful conclusion, exactly as planned and with as many as 11 Member States.

For me, as a Swede, it was disappointing that Swedish Social Democracy had not been able to deliver a result then and there.

Now, two years have gone by - without any response or progress on Sweden' s part.

We are, unfortunately, the country without an EMU strategy.

For my part, I can only congratulate Greece as the twelfth country to adopt the euro.

Now that our discussions are focusing upon Greece and we are carefully picking over the Greek economy, all EU countries ought to join Greece in also adopting the euro.

Many people are to be heard explaining the fall in value of the euro with reference to the fact that the United States' s economy is stronger than Europe' s.

It is amazing, however, that more is not being done by Europe to reverse this trend.

For me, the reason for this is clear.

There is a lack of confidence in the European governments.

It is time to implement the structural changes which are often talked about but which are still not being carried out.

With lower taxes and a more flexible labour market, Europe can enter the new economy.

There needs to be more rationalisation of the budget, more exposure to competition, more deregulation and a more rapid phasing-out of monopolies.

If the governments of Europe give priority to this work, we shall immediately find confidence in the euro increasing.

But many of the EU' s social democratic-led governments are visibly unable to take action.

There is a lack of leadership.

It is not the President of the ECB who can 'talk up' the euro. Instead, it is the Member States which can make the EU and the euro competitive.

Mr President, I would like to thank Mr Goebbels for his report and also the various participants in this debate.

Today we are studying the report on convergence, which deals with the Swedish and Greek problems.

With regard to Sweden, the situation has hardly changed since 1998.

The economic situation is positive, but the legislative adaptation of its Central Bank is not being carried out and it is not a member of the Exchange Rate Mechanism of the EMS.

With regard to Greece, the situation is radically different.

Greece did not fulfil the convergence criteria in 1998 but now it does.

By that I mean that it fulfils them in the strictest sense, using exactly the same criteria as in 1998.

Greece has clearly made a great effort and I therefore have nothing to add to the positive results highlighted by Mr Goebbels in his report.

I would like to talk about some of the points which have been mentioned today, given the concern about the Greek model.

I understand that concern because Greece offers a precedent not only for the new candidate countries but also for the current Member States who, in the future, may join the single currency.

In this respect, it is quite clear that the way we deal with Greece will be crucial but I want to insist that Greece has been treated in the same way as all the other countries when their situation was considered back in 1998.

There have basically been two issues of concern: debt and inflation.

Is this inflation situation sustainable, or durable, as you call it?

In the case of Greece, debt stands at more than 100% of GDP, practically the same as in Belgium or Italy.

I do not think it is reasonable to compare the current situation in Greece with that prevailing in Italy or Belgium.

We must not forget that Belgium and Italy have benefited from the fall in debt resulting from the reduction in interest rates, which is due, in particular, to the approximation of the interest rates of their Central Banks with those of the European Central Bank.

In comparative terms, the Greek situation is similar to the Italian or Belgian situation at the time of their accession to the single currency.

The second point of concern is inflation.

I understand this concern on the basis of two arguments: firstly, it is true that the level of inflation necessary to comply with the criteria was achieved relatively recently; secondly, there will also be a reduction in the interest rates and this will have a positive effect on speeding up the reduction in deficit and debt, but which may generate tensions in the market.

With regard to the first point, concerning whether Greece has achieved this inflation rate in a manner which is unsustainable, I must make a few comments.

Greece has been complying with the inflation criteria for some months and the situation is improving considerably.

This morning I had the opportunity to discuss the Greek figures which were issued a few days ago by the Greek national statistical service.

The Eurostat figures were also published this morning.

At the moment, the harmonised CPI, in the case of Greece, stands at 2.1%, a drop of 0.7% on the March figure; this is a better situation, for example, than certain countries of the monetary union, such as Belgium, Spain, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg and Finland.

In comparative terms, therefore, Greece' s current situation is quite sound.

If we abide by the strict criterion of the last 12 months, we will see that inflation currently stands at 2%. This is clearly better than the situation in Spain and Ireland, and practically the same as Italy, Luxembourg or the Netherlands.

Therefore, in terms of figures, I believe that we should not worry about the Greek situation.

However, the Commission also shares the concern which certain MEPs have highlighted.

We have therefore insisted on two points in discussing both the broad guidelines for economic policies and the convergence report.

Greece has to do two things, and the Greek Government is prepared to do them and has committed itself to doing them: Firstly, it must continue with its liberalisation policies and structural reforms which will improve the inflation situation; secondly, Greece must continue with its policy of reducing the deficit, but in a context of combining policies, a 'policy mix' , which will allow it, in the event that an increase in demand, resulting from a reduction in interest rates, may create tension in terms of inflation, to reconsider its tax policy so that it will not have negative effects on the process of integration into Monetary Union.

I am convinced that all of that will happen, and the Greek Government has committed itself to ensuring that it does.

I therefore believe that the entry of Greece into the euro will help rather than hinder it.

The euro has shown that it is still an attractive currency which some countries want to join.

I hope that the path being taken by Greece will be followed by other Member States in the next few years.

This is the end of a process.

We must wait for its culmination with the decisions in June, but I am convinced that, by welcoming Greece into the euro when the time is right, we will generate more confidence in the face of any other type of arguments against the future progress of the single currency.

Mr President, I have asked the Commissioner when he will do his duty as far as Sweden is concerned and remind the Social Democratic government of a signature which was placed here by Sweden.

When will the Commission enforce the Treaty?

The Commission always respects the Treaty.

It is obliged to comply with it. Please do not forget that it is a fact that Sweden is not participating because its Central Bank has not adapted to the European requirements, a decision which falls to the Swedish authorities.

Secondly, we should not forget either that participation in the Exchange Rate Mechanism of the EMS is a voluntary decision.

You may ask whether this is contrary to the spirit of the Treaty of Maastricht, but it is clearly not a point which we can debate at the moment.

Thank you very much, Commissioner Solbes Mira.

The vote will take place on Thursday at 12 noon.

Transparency of financial relations between Member States and public undertakings

The next item is the report (A5-0109/2000) by Mrs Randzio-Plath, on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, on a proposal for a Commission directive amending Directive 80/723/EEC on the transparency of financial relations between Member States and public undertakings (SEC(1999) 404 - C5-0102/2000 - 2000/2065(COS)).

Mr President, Article 86 of the Treaty captures the very essence of the resolution.

Paragraph 1 stipulates that in the case of public undertakings and undertakings to which Member States grant special or exclusive rights, Member States shall neither enact nor maintain in force any measure contrary to the rules contained in this Treaty.

Paragraph 2 adds, in summary, that undertakings entrusted with the operation of services of general economic interest shall be subject to the rules contained in this Treaty.

It is up to the Commission to monitor the observation of this Article and to provide fitting directives or decisions to the Member States.

The amendment to the directive to which this resolution pertains must enable the Commission to carry out this task more effectively, which is certainly necessary given the ever growing liberalisation of recent years.

Public undertakings and former public undertakings increasingly embrace the commercial world where they, partly with government funding, engage in competition with private undertakings, i.e. their own citizens.

Let it be clear, then, that the much desired level playing field no longer exists.

The present situation promotes money wasting, distorts international trade and, as such, forms a threat to the internal market.

It is surely only logical and reasonable that public undertakings, at the time when they enter into the market, should abide by the same rules as private undertakings.

As a means of guaranteeing a level playing field, the Commission has decided that undertakings with a net turnover in excess of EUR 40 million should keep separate accounts which should illustrate the different activities, the costs and profits pertaining to each of the activities, the method according to which costs and profit are accounted for and the way in which the net profits generated by each activity are used.

These are the considerations with regard to the proposal.

In short, what is the origin of investments in the commercial field?

Initially, the Commission proposal met with a great deal of resistance from EMAC and the Commission.

In actual fact, there was only a handful of PPE-DE Members and the Liberal Group who were in favour of the planned transparency.

We, as MEPs, are elected to exercise democratic control over the executive, in this case the Commission.

The Commission is, in turn, responsible for observing Article 86.

We thus have the duty to ensure that the Commission carries out the assigned task properly but, at the same time, some of us would prevent it from doing exactly that.

I wonder how we must come across in a situation like this.

We make it abundantly clear that we strive for fair competition and utilisation of our internal market but, when the chips are down, we are once again looking solely after our own interests.

In the report on the adoption of the single currency by Greece, I blame the governments for not doing what needs to be done.

Those against this directive are thus giving the governments a helping hand.

As Parliament, we cannot do anything else but to ensure that the markets operate clearly and transparently and that we do not give preferential treatment to certain undertakings and not others.

This directive may seem tedious, but is, in reality, the acid test.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I should like to make three points regarding this directive, and the consultation, on which I should like to congratulate our rapporteur.

I think she has managed to come up with a reasonable balance within our committee in what almost became, on occasions, an ideological debate.

In your proposal, Commissioner, you quite rightly exclude a number of sectors, and we can only be pleased at this.

Secondly, as our rapporteur pointed out, I should like to draw attention to the fact that the jurisdiction of Member States in this field must not be disregarded.

At the present time, there is no definition of services of general economic interest at European Union level.

We must therefore bring subsidiarity into play, and we are well aware that in such areas, national sensibilities may be expressed in diverse ways.

I can therefore only urge you, Commissioner, to show as much drive and determination in making full use of all the terms of the Treaty, particularly those which, following the Treaty of Amsterdam, grant you new scope for action, especially with a view to defining the ability to provide services of general economic interest.

I would urge Mrs Peijs to read again the latest version of the Treaty with regard to what she considers to be the last word on the law on competition within the European Union.

My third observation, Commissioner, is on public broadcasting services.

Once again, I cannot ignore what we incorporated into our Treaty when we amended it in Amsterdam.

This sector is very clearly covered by specific conditions.

This shows the determination of the Member States to treat this sector as a sector in its own right falling outside the rules of competition which exist in other areas.

I therefore feel that the proposals on transparency that you are putting forward cannot be applied to that sector under the same conditions. I think it would be rather difficult in such a sector to implement the notion of separate accounting systems making it possible to draw a distinction between competitive activities and public service activities in the broadcasting sector, especially as, I might mention in passing, there is no single harmonised European accounting system.

I just wanted to complain about the quality of sound reproduction.

There is a bad echo in the Chamber, as a result of which we can hardly hear those speaking in their original languages.

Can something be done about this?

We will try to resolve the problem you have raised in your speech, Mrs Maes.

Mr President, the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party welcomes the Commission' s proposal, which will lead to increased public scrutiny of public undertakings and to increased competition.

We want to thank Mrs Randzio-Plath for cooperating so well.

State aid distorts competition and is unfair to both consumers and companies.

In principle, the Treaty prohibits all types of state aid, including cross-subsidies.

The Treaty does not, however, prohibit the existence of public undertakings providing services in the public interest.

Whatever one may think about this, it is for the Member States themselves to define what is meant by services in the public interest.

The Member States should not, however, themselves decide what kinds of aid they will be granting these undertakings.

The Court of First Instance in Luxembourg stated as late as last week that state support for TV and radio companies may only be provided once the Commission has said that this is compatible with the Treaty.

The rules must be applied in the same way to all parties.

All aid which is not used to finance services in the public interest is prohibited and is to be opposed.

State radio stations and TV companies now often provide services which are outside the scope of what we call services in the public interest.

Those resources which the State has injected into companies to finance their basic activities ought not, of course, to be used to finance the provision of Internet connections.

In that case, competition is distorted, to the disadvantage both of consumers and of private companies.

The Commission' s proposal requires companies to openly account for the resources provided to them as public undertakings and for how these have been used.

Companies must also show what costs they have, where their income comes from and how this is derived from their various activities.

Both these obligations are simple means of upholding the rules governing relations between private and public undertakings.

This is important for the purpose of maintaining proper rules in the internal market.

Mr President, Commissioner Monti, on the subject of the proposal before us, I should like to make four remarks or observations on behalf of my Group, but not without first congratulating our fellow Member, Mrs Randzio-Plath.

First of all, I should like to thank Commissioner Monti for having had the courtesy to consult the European Parliament.

A Commission directive has been referred to us, even though, I believe, it is not legally mandatory to consult Parliament, although the subject is clearly a crucial one.

This leads me to reiterate the hope that the forthcoming Intergovernmental Conference will propose subjecting all legislation on competition policy to the codecision procedure, thereby enabling us legally to work on a more equal footing.

My second comment concerns the actual purpose of this proposed directive.

It has an extremely specific aim, which is to prevent, subject to monitoring by the Commission, any legitimate public aid to services of general interest being misappropriated to the benefit of activities which are themselves open to competition.

Having said that, the problem is by no means easy to solve, as the previous speaker made clear.

Indeed he states - and I would be curious to know Mr Monti' s response to this - that Internet connection does not, for example, come under the heading of universal service. I think that this runs quite counter to the objectives of the European Council in Lisbon, and that it is necessary, on the contrary, to have a comprehensive vision of universal service.

One might go so far as to imagine, even if this is a matter for subsidiarity, that the Community as such should at least define the minimum standards of what the universal service may be. Otherwise we are heading towards a relatively chaotic situation.

Thirdly, I should like to know the Commission' s reaction to Recital No 4 of our report, in which the rapporteur and the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs effectively ask the Commission to specify how important it considers services of general interest to be.

I await the Commission' s response on the matter.

Fourthly and finally, there is one amendment, Amendment No 3, which is explicitly intended to exclude the broadcasting sector from the scope of the proposed directive.

I think this amendment is an improvement on the current text. Paragraph 6 is a masterpiece of diplomatic language but is relatively incomprehensible.

I should therefore like to see the Commission expressing its support for Amendment No 3 as proposed in plenary.

Mr President, I also wish to add my congratulations to Mrs Randzio-Plath for the work on this report, which has been difficult at times.

This directive sets out to identify and prevent subsidies which distort competition.

In order to do this, the directive proposes to require public undertakings and private undertakings that perform public tasks to carry out separate accounting procedures.

I obviously agree with the rapporteur that competition rules must be applied rigorously in order to prevent cross-subsidies that go against the purpose of the aid.

However, in the sphere of public broadcasting it is essential to remember that, in accordance with the Amsterdam Protocol, in the system of public broadcasting in Member States, it is up to each Member State to specify the financial and organisational structure of public service broadcasting.

This has, as I said, been a difficult report; it has been fraught and often very tense in committee and, more specifically, at the committee votes.

However, I believe the final outcome will work and is a practical and correct approach.

Mr President, despite this discussion in Parliament concerning the changes which the Commission would like to make to the directive on the transparency of financial relations between Member States and public undertakings, we will not have much of a say in it because it will be the Commission, and the Commission only, that will make decisions without further involving the European Parliament or the Council, much to our regret.

In our opinion, on the basis of its autonomous powers concerning competition policy, the Commission approaches some sectors from a purely economic angle without taking into consideration other social aspects.

For example, in the dossier on financing public broadcasting, the Commission still overlooks the cultural aspects and the aspect of media-pluralism, to our mind.

Admittedly, an exception is made but then this exception accommodates further exceptions.

For example, it is very difficult for public broadcasting to survive in an increasingly commercialised environment.

I am against the commercialisation of culture.

In my opinion, culture is above these market laws.

The Commission has thus overstepped the mark.

With this amendment to the directive, it is trying to change the Treaty of Amsterdam, namely the public broadcasting protocol which was attached to it.

I am, therefore, of the opinion that the IGC should apply the normal legislative procedure for codecision by the Council and Parliament to general competition policy legislation.

I can already tell you that I will be here once again when you produce a directive on film.

Mr President, I congratulate the European Parliament on the major work accomplished during the debate on the Randzio-Plath report.

I would particularly like to thank Parliament for the support it has shown for the Commission' s initiative and I welcome its approval of the steps to increase transparency in the use of public resources and thereby guarantee fair competition.

You welcomed the Commission' s consultation of Parliament, despite the fact that it was not obliged to do this under its institutional statutes as Mr Jonckheer and other speakers recalled.

Moreover, the way the debate went reassures me that it was useful for the Commission and in the best interests of the initiative for Parliament to be consulted.

As it stands, the directive on transparency gives the Commission the authority to carry out inquiries into financial relations between Member States and their public undertakings.

In short, the draft amendment to the directive is intended to ensure the introduction of separate accounting procedures for specific types of firms.

The firms affected by this measure are those which, on the one hand, provide services of general economic interest in exchange for various different types of compensation, which may be special dues or payments, and, on the other, also perform normal general activities, thereby operating in competition with other firms.

Clearly, the profits generated by the continuation of reserved activities or by compensation provided for reasons of general interest or public service are not intended to finance competitive activities, and must therefore not give rise to internal subsidies.

However, in recent years, the Commission has had to examine a growing number of claims related precisely to such internal compensation.

As Mrs Peijs mentioned, in the course of its inquiries, the Commission has had to examine these cases of internal compensation and it was frequently unable to obtain sufficient information regarding the costs and profits generated by the various activities.

Therefore, the Commission now proposes to introduce a system of separate accounts for these types of companies which will allow them to perform their role as surety for competition properly.

I would also like to stress that the obligation to keep separate accounts also benefits the Member States, in that it provides them with the necessary information in order to avoid granting state aid which does not comply with the Treaty and to notify the Commission of the aid envisaged.

The directive requires that companies which provide general services and which, at the same time, operate outside that public service mission, keep separate accounts.

This requirement applies to both private and public companies.

The directive does not apply to companies which only provide general services and do not carry on any other activity, nor does it require the separation of different activities which all come under the heading of general services.

In other words, ladies and gentlemen, the directive is intended to make the areas around the line between services of general interest and other activities transparent with the minimum of disruption.

I would like to emphasise the fact that the directive makes no changes either, of course, to the provisions of the Treaty on the awarding of general services, or to the awarding of the management of these services to specific companies.

The directive lays down the principles for the introduction of greater transparency, although, in observance of the subsidiarity principle, it leaves the Member States free to adopt appropriate national measures.

I would now like to turn to some of the comments made.

Mr Jonckheer wondered whether Internet access was to be included in the universal service.

On this point, I can only say that the last Telecommunications Council did hold a debate on this matter.

As regards the doubts expressed by the rapporteur, Mrs Randzio-Plath, I would briefly like to summarise them.

On the subject of the definition of general services, I would stress once again that the directive does not make any changes, it does not reduce the current competences of the Member States - Mrs Berès and Mr Langen - regarding the definition of public interest.

This also applies to the public broadcasting sector, in respect of which the Amsterdam Protocol confirmed the competence of the Member States in the definition of the admission of public service.

Mrs Berès, Mr Jonckheer, Mr Crowley, Mr Skinner and Mrs Maes remarked that it might be possible to exclude broadcasting.

I have to say that this sector could well be among the fields where the directive is most frequently applied, where this directive on transparency is of most service, for, even taking the Amsterdam Protocol into account, of course, this nevertheless leaves the Commission with the task of verifying that aid granted for the provision of public services is not excessive in respect of the costs.

A requirement for verification therefore remains, and this directive should be useful for this purpose.

The size of company is irrelevant, and I am now addressing Mr Langen et al: the EUR 40 million threshold excludes small- and medium-sized businesses.

If we were to raise this threshold we would be excluding companies where, due to their size, we cannot suppose that the aid does not affect trade between Member States.

In any case, in order to give an idea of the size, only 0.2% of all non-farming enterprises in the Community are above this threshold.

Finally, I would like to say - and it appears that this has been perfectly well understood by the Members of Parliament - that this directive is not in the slightest an attack on public companies.

Quite the opposite, to be honest, I see it as a great show of support for public companies.

This is because it provides clarity and therefore does not expose public services to the attacks which would otherwise have been levelled at them.

As Mr Olle Schmidt stressed, this transparency is essential not only for a proper application of competition policy but, indeed, if I may say so, it is also crucial for there to be a proper relationship between the authorities and the taxpayers, the citizens.

I therefore feel that, although, as Mrs Peijs stressed, this directive may appear extremely tedious, it actually allows us to get to the heart of the issue, not only of competition but also of civil coexistence and economic democracy.

Thank you very much, Commissioner Monti.

The vote will take place on Thursday at 12 noon.

Mr President, I would like to thank Mr Tajani, Mr van Velzen and Mr Poettering for their valuable, substantial contributions to this debate.

I also welcome the mandate conferred on me by the European People' s Party to present such a major topic as the poor countries' debt, which is stifling the economy of the world' s poorest developing countries.

The scale of this issue is global, and it involves all the civilised, democratic countries which are helplessly standing by, watching the constant growth of the debt of poor countries, which now have to set aside an average of 40% of their annual budget to finance it.

Every year, the debt increases by approximately 12%, and it has risen from USD 110 billion in the 80s to its present value of USD 350 billion.

Parliament has attempted to deal with the issue on more than one occasion, but it has never appeared to find satisfactory solutions.

This year, on account of it being a Jubilee Year, the Holy See and other quarters are calling for the substantial reduction, if not total cancellation, of the international debt in such a way as to facilitate the integration of the most indebted countries into the world production and commercial trade circuit.

The UN Secretary-General also fervently appealed, on 3 April last, to the donor countries and international financial institutions to cancel all the official debts of the highly indebted poor countries from their accounts as a millennium gesture.

A similar appeal was made by the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund, but the time for appeals has passed. It is facts that are important now.

If we analyse the situation, we realise that, on the one hand, we are talking about an almost irrecoverable debt and, on the other, that in return for cancelling that debt, we can demand greater respect for human rights, greater democracy and social actions benefiting poor communities - improving conditions for children, the elderly and the disabled.

In addition, we would be stemming migration flows, which, quite apart from being a problem for the migrants' countries of origin, are, above all, a problem for the host countries.

Therefore, I would ask whether the Council is aware of all the initiatives which have hitherto been adopted by each individual country of the Union to reduce or cancel the debt of highly indebted poor countries, and whether it would be possible for a résumé to be produced showing the practical actions which have been undertaken by these countries and the commitments made, to prove that these initiatives are not just mere political vote-winning manoeuvres, as they all too often appear to be.

Finally, considering that there is a clear need for a common foreign policy displaying Europe as a coherent system capable of undertaking united initiatives, does the Commission not feel that it would be appropriate to create a structure to study this issue, which would work together with the local Churches, NGOs and civil society and act upon the conclusions reached?

This would, I feel, be a different way of interpreting the meaning of the millennium, this time in the name of solidarity between communities.

Mr President, resolving the problem of the external debt of less developed countries is undoubtedly an essential factor in the stability, security and development of these countries, in eradicating poverty and in stemming the migratory flows that affect and weaken them.

We are all aware of the situation.

These countries' resources - and even resources that they do not have - are used up to service their debts; for some of these countries, interest and capital repayments account for 40% of their budget.

In spite of this, the debt continues to grow exponentially, and there is consequently an ever-widening gap between these countries and the industrialised countries, which often behave like unscrupulous moneylenders.

The imposition of unsuitable structural adjustment programmes by the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund and inadequate cooperation and development aid actions by the industrialised countries, which fall considerably short of the 0.7% of GDP recommended by the United Nations, both contribute to this gap.

There is an erroneous, trade-based concept that has also made matters worse. This concept suggests that, under the auspices of the WTO, the market can regulate and resolve everything, whereas the opposite is true: economic globalisation has greatly contributed to accentuating disparities, increasing injustice and holding back development.

It is obvious that this situation must, therefore, be resolved by adopting a worldwide project and by a new world order that puts the development of these countries at the top of its priorities. This must be based on the idea that everyone, and I mean everyone, including the rich countries, will benefit from this development.

A project of this kind can only succeed through debt relief, which cannot be reduced to a process that is merely full of good intentions, as recommended by the G7 countries, whose contribution represents no more than 1% of Third World debt and which is today limited in practice to partial debt relief for just three or four countries.

The European Union and its Member States can, and must, speak up on this issue, abandoning their limited outlooks, which are full of conditions, which often accompany shamefaced announcements about debt cancellation, and end the aid cuts that have been taking place and which are proposed for the future. Instead, they must put forward a broad and resolute plan that will make a decisive contribution to ending a situation of this kind and help to put the development of such important parts of the world into perspective.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, initiatives in favour of cancelling all or part of the third world debt are proliferating in the year 2000.

On this subject, the Cairo Summit did not, any more than other summits, come up with any even remotely clear conclusion.

This step is, however, a matter of simple common sense, and one is tempted to ask the Council whether they intend one day to refer the matter to their common sense.

The whole thing verges on the ridiculous.

Not only do the countries of the south not have the financial resources to pay back their debts but, on top of that, the international economic order, which has foisted a demented concept of liberalism on the world, is preventing the majority of our partners in the south - I am thinking in particular of those in Northern Africa and sub-Saharan Africa - acceding to the conditions for development that is even remotely sustainable.

Such conditions are continually demolished by the blind application of free trade, accompanied by the obsessive, ideological privatisation of the exploitation of most of their wealth.

The rich countries, foolishly falling in line with the imperialist rules of the IMF and the World Bank, were nonetheless the first to realise that this cannot damage economic take-off since their own development did not fail on occasion to resort to the rules of protectionism, ensuring, moreover, a privileged place for the state and for public intervention in all its forms.

Peace between nations can only be achieved if there is balance.

Political and economic balance are, on the other hand, devastating to a world which is increasingly unipolar.

As we well know, despite the head-in-the-sand policy practised by rich countries with no thought for the future which takes the world down some highly dangerous roads, and while this House gets bogged down in details and side issues, it is high time that we were able to look at the world as a whole.

Instead of leaving our only reasonable policy, i.e. the Lomé agreements, high and dry, we ought to be forming genuine economic and, more importantly, political partnerships with the Mediterranean and African countries.

But, for that, Europe would have to have an authority legitimate and clear-sighted enough to get out of the trap of all-out liberalism and, of course, it has no such authority worthy of the name.

Mr President, hearing the other speakers, I note that we all agree on the facts.

The harsh and tragic figures are there for all to see.

The 50 poorest countries spend twice what they receive in aid in order to pay off their debt.

An average of 40% of the budget of poor countries is dedicated to debt payments.

Not only does that undermine their economic development, not only does that significantly reduce their ability to provide basic social services, such as health or education, but it creates a sort of slavery which benefits Western societies.

In fact two thirds of the debt is generated by interest on earlier loans, loans taken out to pay for the things we sold them, which multinationals sold them.

This is highly reminiscent of the exploitation of agricultural workers in some countries who are forced to buy from the boss' s shop at inflated prices and who are then forced to work for the rest of their lives for scant wages in order to pay off their debts to this shop.

What action are we taking to prevent this?

The G7 countries announced amid much publicity a debt reduction programme, but conditions are such that it cannot be applied.

This initiative remains subject to macroeconomic reform programmes under the aegis of the IMF or the World Bank, which run counter to the objectives of eradicating poverty, due to their restrictive effect on the ability to spend on social services and job creation.

Some major countries have announced that they are going to cancel debts, but this is selective, linked to the interests of certain parties, and is achieved to the detriment of development budgets.

The indebted countries were expecting a strong message from the Conference between the European Union and Africa held in Cairo recently.

They were given plenty of fine words, but no practical action.

What initiatives do the Commission and the Council propose to take at European or international level in order to further relieve or cancel the burden of debt in order to aid the poorest countries?

How does the Commission plan to ensure that the appropriations made available by cancelling the debt are properly invested in eradicating poverty and in sustainable development?

Finally, what is the Commission' s reaction to the requests presented by some civil society organisations in the countries of the south for improvements in monitoring the macroeconomic adaptation plan, by organising conferences on national development, in order to give public opinion in these countries an opportunity to define national priorities and projects?

The Commission's contribution to debt relief can be seen in the HIPC initiative.

This was launched in September 1996 with the aim of helping to relieve the debt burden of the poorest countries that make adjustment efforts in a concerted way.

It represents a coordinated effort by all donors including, in particular, multilateral creditors.

It was the first time ever that the multilateral aspect had been addressed directly.

In 1999, on the occasion of the G7 Cologne Summit, ministers agreed to an expanded and more flexible initiative that will provide faster, deeper and broader debt relief.

As a result of the proposed changes, the costs of this HIPC II Initiative are expected to increase significantly to some USD 27.4 billion from a previous estimated level of some USD 13 billion of HIPC I. In fact, the original estimate of the cost of HIPC I was around USD 8 billion only.

For the record, the Commission has already made a large contribution to HIPC I. The Council adopted, on 6 July 1998, a decision on the Community' s participation in the HIPC Initiative with regard to its claims, special loans and risk capital managed by the European Investment Bank for eligible ACP countries.

As mentioned before, the Community, as a creditor, is only a small player in this discussion.

Fortunately, we are mainly a provider of direct grant assistance and not loans.

We set aside EUR 40 million of interest accumulated on EDF funds which should cover the cost for the first six country cases.

Community assistance for Uganda and Guyana was delivered in mid-1998 and early 2000, amounting to EUR 4.59 million and EUR 6.44 million respectively.

The Community has since decided to considerably enhance support for the HIPC II Initiative.

At the annual meeting in Washington in September 1999, it was announced that the Community' s contribution would be in the order of EUR 1 billion.

The Commission subsequently submitted draft proposals for decisions to the Joint EU/ACP Council and the EU Council which were adopted by the General Affairs Council on 6 December and by the Joint EU/ACP Council on 8 December.

It has to be borne in mind that the ACP countries' agreement is required because it is EDF money that is being reallocated so their consent is needed as part of these decisions.

At present, the Commission is in the process of finalising discussions with its Member States, the European Investment Bank, the World Bank and the African Development Bank about the main principles of the actual implementation of the Community support for the HIPC II Initiative, both as a donor and as a creditor.

In June, it will present the relevant financing proposals.

The Community' s global contribution to the HIPC Trust Fund in its capacity as a donor will amount to EUR 680 million for qualifying ACP countries.

EUR 670 million will be earmarked for the African Development Bank in order to cover its financing gap in the HIPC Initiative and EUR 10 million for the only non-African HIPC ACP country, Guyana.

The EUR 680 million Community contribution originating from the EDF will be channelled to the HIPC Trust Fund in 3 tranches taking into consideration effective financing needs as well as support from other donors.

According to the information available, needs for the first tranche this year will be in the order of the magnitude of EUR 250 million.

The first EC tranche will be paid in July.

Besides these contributions to be financed from uncommitted EDF funds, a EUR 54 million contribution to the HIPC Trust Fund will also be made towards non-ACP HIPCs drawing on resources from the budgetary lines for Latin America and Asia.

We want, in other words, to make sure that the EU participation in HIPC is global and in accordance with the figures in HIPC.

Finally, it must be stressed that the ACP/EU Council decision to reinforce the EC Structural Adjustment Facility by EUR 250 million will partly be used to provide interim relief to eligible HIPC countries belonging to the ACP.

It is important to stress that the Community contribution to debt relief should not be seen as a substitute for contributions from bilateral donors.

These are still needed in order to fully finance the initiative announced at the G7 Summit in Cologne.

The expectation created a year ago was that the G7 countries would come up with additional resources.

As regards other contributions to the HIPC Trust Fund, it may be worth noting that the draft budget by the US administration suggests a US contribution of USD 600 million which follows on from pledges made earlier and which corresponds to the share of HIPC calculated by the World Bank for the US.

This draft budget needs to be passed in Congress and this is definitely facing some difficulties.

In fact, it seems very doubtful that the US will deliver its share as planned.

The funds released by the Commission for the HIPC Initiative are subject to the same principles as other funds originating from the European Development Fund and the Commission is carefully involving the EDF Committee, that is Member States, at all stages.

Article 366(b) of the Lomé Convention in its present form imposes strict conditions on the possible use of EDF money.

Politically speaking, it would not make sense to stop EDF financed projects in Article 366(b) countries and to provide them with EC quasi direct non-earmarked budget support, for example through HIPC debt relief mechanisms.

It is the responsibility of the Commission to ensure that EDF money does not facilitate a coup d'état or provide additional budgetary room for manoeuvre to enable dictators to oppress their people.

It is the very purpose of Article 366(b) in its present form to make things more complicated for countries breaching elementary human rights and good governance principles.

This view has also been clearly expressed by the European Court of Auditors when commenting on these issues.

Our hands are somewhat tied in this discussion on how we can accomplish these things in practice.

In the discussions, which led last year to the agreement on enhancing the HIPC Initiative, there was a strong consensus in the donor community that poverty reduction needs to be re-emphasised as a main focus of development efforts.

The concept of the poverty reduction strategy papers was launched to provide a framework for mainstreaming poverty reduction in government and donor policies.

It will require a country-specific approach to assessing a country' s position in development, poverty strategies and institutional capacity.

The Commission has expressed its strong support for this radically new approach initiated by the World Bank and the IMF.

Country ownership is paramount for the development of these ideas and governments will have responsibility for both the design process and the final product.

The Commission attaches particular importance to an open participatory process involving civil society, parliaments and all relevant international institutions and donors.

Policies that address issues of social justice and equity are as central as economic policy to growth and poverty reduction.

The Community is maintaining and stepping up its commitment to support macroeconomic reforms, social sectors, regional integration and sound economic management.

This is all needed in order to make sure that fighting poverty remains the central theme when we are actually improving the situation of these poor countries through the enhanced HIPC Initiative.

I think that it is quite good that the Commission and the EU in general clearly stand out as the single most important contributor towards making this initiative actually work.

Mr President, when one hears of the horrendous debt that has built up in many African states, the first reaction is one of deep sympathy.

However, I have had the privilege of visiting many of these countries in the past year and I have to say that, in many cases, one' s sympathy turns to anger when one sees the abject poverty that people in these countries live in while their leaders and ministers revel in wealth and prosperity and one begins to question the distribution of aid and debt relief.

Despite all the help given from Europe, individual nation states and institutions, Africa' s external debt is growing by about 12% per annum and some countries are repaying more in interest than they are receiving in aid.

That cannot be allowed to continue, but neither can the historic reasons for causing it to happen.

I will be criticised by some honourable Members for saying it, but conditionality must be built into not only development aid but also debt relief.

I have always maintained that good governance was more important than pure democracy if you are going to stamp out corrupt practices, and if we cannot wipe these practices out we are only pouring good money after bad.

We must therefore be in a position to monitor the effect of debt relief and make sure that all of it is spent on civil society to give better health, education and employment prospects to the people who are being denied it.

There is a secondary effect of bad governance and that is the lack of external investment into these countries which denies them the chance of improved prosperity, better employment prospects and a higher standard of living.

The fight against fraud and corruption should be made a condition for allocating debt relief and development aid - not my words, Mr President, but the words of President Obasanjo of Nigeria in Abuja at the opening of the 13th session of the ACP-EU Assembly.

If only that could be echoed by every other president in Africa, the resistance to giving debt relief would diminish and some real progress could be made in alleviating the misery and poverty of millions of people.

Mr President, while we are talking, in Sierra Leone the latest episode in a ten-year long tragedy is taking place. This civil war has been responsible for 50 000 deaths, 2 million refugees and the brutal mutilation of 40 000 men and women of all ages in a systematic campaign of terror.

Most of Africa is affected by similar tragedies, including the tragedy affecting the Sahrawi people, with which we came face to face this morning just outside here.

The other side to globalisation is poverty, the indebtedness of the poorer developing countries and the extension of those conflicts which reduce potential for development whilst exacerbating other conflicts and causing fresh poverty.

This is why the recent EU-Africa Summit held in Cairo was so important. It reopened global dialogue with the countries of the African continent and, for the first time, associated the development aid policy with the upholding of democratic principles, rights and the fight against corruption.

A long-term strategy is essential, and cancelling the debt is the starting point for such a strategy.

As the resolution tabled by the European Socialist Party states, it is therefore important to increase the percentage of resources set aside by industrialised countries for the poorest countries, but, at the same time, the quality of our undertaking is also crucial.

The resolution puts forward two major options: new sustainability criteria and greater flexibility for the more indebted countries, and the bilateral cancellation of the debts of the least developed ACP countries.

These are initial, tangible recommendations, although, in future, we must avoid the repetition of the spiral of debt, with no checks on the choices made.

Indeed, we are aware that it is not sufficient to cancel the debt if the other mechanisms determining all the policies remain unchanged.

Cancellation of the debt must be conditional upon the use to which the resources thereby released are put. These resources must be invested in schools, hospitals and the human development of communities, not wasted, as still often occurs today, due to corruption or, what is worse, used to boost the arms trade and support ruinous wars.

The global economy must be accompanied by a global policy; growth must go hand in hand with the upholding of human and civil rights and the consolidation of democracy.

In order to avoid the spiral of debt, we therefore need to supplement the means for action: there must be greater cooperation, increased trade exchange, an increase in initiatives to prevent conflicts and more coherent opposition to corrupt, indebted governments which visit upon their citizens the hardship caused by crises and poor development.

Our commitment to cancelling the debt is a precondition for the introduction of all the policies for reducing poverty.

Resolution of the debt issue must be accompanied by actions promoting local development.

In order to succeed, we need to harmonise national policies and supplement them with greater opening up of the markets.

The recent EU-ACP agreements follow this rationale and provide assistance for the 31 least developed countries over a period of time which should end in 2005.

In this context, it is essential to involve the private sector in order to boost trade exchange and, in addition to transferring resources, to create the necessary conditions for the growth of an internal market for developing countries, and provide incentives as well as laying down conditions.

Mr President, there is no point flogging a dead horse.

This is why the disastrous vicious circle of loans, debts and new loans must be broken. The immense repayment costs prevent any form of development.

There is hardly any money left for education, health care or for building well-functioning government machinery.

Debt relief is therefore a matter of extreme urgency.

This should be facilitated in a joint effort involving all creditors, the Union, the States, especially the United States, international institutions and banks.

However, a very broad strategy will not get us much further.

The debt cancellation programmes must be tailored to the specific circumstances of each individual country.

It is essential in this respect to tackle not just the social problems, but also to lay a firm foundation for sustainable economic development.

If this fails to materialise, then foreign investments will not be forthcoming either.

A prerequisite for relieving debts is sound financial housekeeping within the governments concerned.

We should not be naïve about this.

We can no longer write out blank cheques.

In the past, billions never reached the intended causes.

A great deal of money got into the hands of corrupt regimes which allowed Swiss banks to benefit from the large-scale theft of development aid.

When will the civilised world finally realise that countries which maintain banking secrecy are accessory to huge crimes at the expense of the poorest population groups.

The IMF and the World Bank started an initiative back in 1996 to relieve the debts of the poorest countries.

Last summer, the conditions were amended, with good reason.

Aid was made conditional upon tangible results.

It would be wonderful if the European Union and the Member States were to take a generous stance if the conditions were met.

Let us do everything possible to help the poorest countries fight poverty.

This can work if the victim is involved in his own rescue.

Mr President, I think we all agree how completely absurd it is that many of the world' s poorest countries sometimes pay more in interest and for debt management than they receive in aid.

There are at least two questions which I think must be answered.

The first is: how can the EU and the G7 nations, together with other Western countries, comply with their commitments so that these do not merely become empty promises?

In spite of what the Council and the Commission have said, it is, of course, a fact that, notwithstanding the praiseworthy initiative that has been taken, the G7 countries have not so far, unfortunately, taken measures to comply with that initiative.

All that has happened so far is that the debts of a mere three developing countries have been written off to the tune of 0.25 per cent.

Even those EU countries which have said that they wish to write off the debts have not appropriated funds in their budgets for this purpose. On occasions, the funds concerned have been taken from the areas of cooperation and development.

The most important question of all is: how can it be ensured that the resources are properly used in developing countries?

The Council responded by saying that it was not in favour of that kind of control.

However, the EU, the IMF and the World Bank have, of course, established criteria in other contexts, so why should we not be able to establish criteria to ensure that, for the people, the result of debt cancellation really will be...

(The President cut the speaker off)

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, there are 800 million Africans today and there will be twice as many in 25 years' time, and obviously they are not the only ones to be living in developing countries. Many people in Africa are sinking into poverty and increasing numbers of them are immigrating to European countries, which are in the throes of a demographic depression.

It must be remembered that this poverty coincides with the botched decolonisation of the 1960s which plunged many of these countries into poverty and ethnic conflict, related also to the establishment of dictatorships which were corrupt and, more often than not, it must be acknowledged, Socialist.

What we would like to say is that cancelling poor countries' debt is no doubt a laudable intention and we are in favour of staggering payments, but we would like to see the root of the trouble being tackled with the same seriousness.

We may note, for example, that until the 1990s, the African states which were still linked to France by means of economic, monetary and military cooperation agreements represented a haven of stability and relative prosperity.

The same is true of the states which have maintained links with western powers by means of economic agreements of this type.

We think this is a more serious solution to the problems of the third world than the outrageous recommendation which the UN made on 4 January to the effect that, in order to offset its falling birth rate, Europe should prepare to accept 159 million immigrants from African countries over the next 25 years.

Turning Europe into a third-world country is not, we feel, the way to help the third world achieve a genuine degree of economic development.

The real solution is in Africa in the form of a development policy which enables Africans to live in their own countries, which raises the question of the alleged benefits of free trade.

Our opinion is that there are no real benefits or, if there are, then only for countries at a comparable economic and social level, and that it is only when protected by secure frontiers and customs rights that these countries will gradually progress from the cottage industry phase to that of industrialisation.

Mr President, this year is 2000 AD, a jubilee year.

It is a year in which, based on the concept of the biblical Holy Year, we need to think seriously about relieving the debt of the poorest of the poor.

In the Holy Year, each fiftieth year, debts were cancelled, slaves released and the land was left fallow in Israel.

Such a year created the opportunity to start the future with a clean slate.

In analogy with this biblical reference, the year 2000 should become a Holy Year for the world' s poorest of the poor.

We therefore welcome national and international initiatives to reduce debts with open arms.

However, I cannot refrain from making a number of critical remarks in respect of the proud announcements made by a number of G7 countries over the past few years.

These rich countries boast about the fact that they no longer make a fuss about the gigantic amounts which these poor countries owe them.

Experiences with the HIPC initiative dating back to 1996, however, have shown that debt reduction has not always had an altogether positive effect on the development of the poor.

In the best-case scenarios, 100% debt relief only yields an actual 40% reduction in the debt.

The reason for this is firstly that the conditions tied in with the debt relief are such that only few countries qualify.

Moreover, room for debt relief is often found in national and international budgets for development policy.

As such, it is not a matter of making available additional financial resources but more a matter of shifting funds.

Poor countries may spend less on repaying their debts, but they also have to cope with a drop in foreign aid.

If we really want to take the fight against world poverty seriously, debt reduction should be accompanied by an active policy to combat poverty.

In this respect, it is desirable to deploy local governments and NGOs.

These minor observations, however, do not detract from the fact that concessions made must be met and new initiatives have to be launched.

A careful and generous stance is a welcome bonus in this respect.

The Commission, Member States and international donors must make every effort to turn the year of Our Lord 2000 into a Holy Year in the true sense of the word.

Mr President, fine words have been spoken about cancelling the enormous debts of a large number of developing countries to mark the millennium, as Mr Van Dam mentioned a moment ago. These speeches were given at the G7 meeting, at the European Summit in Lisbon and at the recent Euro-African Summit in Cairo.

The question we are left with today is: what will come of this?

We have heard a few examples from the HIPC-I and HIPC-II programmes and I understand that 1 billion is tied up in this second programme.

The total debt burden of all developing countries comes to 350 billion.

This means that, in comparison, this 1 billion is really peanuts.

Many of those countries pay 25% to 40% of their national budget on interest and repayment into banks in Western Europe, the United States and Japan.

The harsh reality is that the billions which are paid to repay debts far exceed the development aid.

That is a disastrous situation because we often ask ourselves why our development aid does not work.

Well, here is one of the most important reasons.

If a sum of money comes in and subsequently a sum has to be repaid which is three or four times the original amount, then those countries will not make any headway, of course.

One question which remains is: should you cancel debts unconditionally?

I do not share the view of Mr Miranda or other MEPs who think one should.

In my opinion, conditions should very much be part of the deal.

The countries involved should be the poorest ones, to start with.

They should have a democratic government and a pluriform parliament which keeps the government in check.

The country must fight corruption actively.

The countries concerned should not be at war or participate in wars, and an agreed proportion of the budget must really be spent on social schemes for the poorest citizens, and must be invested in education, health care and social security.

I do not agree with Mr Da Costa who said a moment ago that this might be somewhat neo-colonial.

It was even agreed in Copenhagen, at the Social Summit for developing countries which was held there a while ago, that a proportion was to be spent on those costs.

Mr President, we should really call for something to be done about this.

We should simply spend 10% of the total development budget on cancelling these debts.

If we do nothing, the countries will remain trapped in a downward spiral.

Mr President, I have listened with interest to both the Council and the Commission.

The Socialist Group considers that the debt which blights the development of the world' s poorest countries cannot be dealt with in isolation, as a purely financial problem, but it must be dealt with within the framework of a broad and coherent strategy which, through the eradication of poverty, leads to development.

To this end, firstly, the cancellation of debt must not involve the removal of other sources of finance, but cancellation must be one more measure in a coherent development policy.

Secondly, the funds made available through the cancellation of debt must be used for human development funds, particularly for investment in health and education.

I do not agree with the Council when it says that this may mean a new form of colonisation.

I do not believe that to be the case.

In order to be effective, in development terms, the cancellation of debt also requires, as we request in the resolution, a global strategy implemented in unison in and by the international financial institutions.

The European Union, as a major contributor of development aid, must coordinate its action in this regard and make the elimination of poverty the common objective of its Member States, one aspect of this being the cancellation of debt in the poorest countries.

This is therefore an example of the need for coherence and coordination between Community policies.

The common foreign and security policy, which we too often treat as just a security policy, must address this issue as well as commercial and development policies.

The highly-indebted poor countries, who are the beneficiaries of this debt cancellation strategy that has already been adopted by the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund, must commit themselves to suitable macroeconomic policies, to social development objectives, to increase the credibility of the state, which is the only way to attract foreign investment, and to strengthen their institutional capacity.

By uniting the actions of debtors and creditors in a global strategy aimed at the elimination of poverty, it is possible that we will achieve objective 15 of the Copenhagen Summit on social development, which is an objective which we fully identify with.

We therefore strongly urge all Member States and the Commission to support the international financial institutions' HIPC initiative for highly indebted poor countries.

Mr President, it is commendable that the international community is apparently serious about reducing debt.

Unfortunately, this inspired policy comes too late, far too late.

As early as the late eighties, UNICEF stated that the rich obtained the loans in the Third World and the poor were saddled with the debts, and UNICEF was right.

According to Oxfam, there are 19 000 children who die daily in the developing countries as a result of the debt burden and as an indirect result, admittedly, of the IMF programmes which require certain countries to cut down their health care expenditure by one third.

Is it not mind-boggling that countries sometimes have to spend up to 40% of their budget on paying off debts, which have often been accumulated by irresponsible and avaricious dictators, with the unspoken collaboration of the World Bank and private western banks?

Let us learn from past experience.

I am in favour of debt reduction but not on a level repayment or unconditional basis.

It should feature as part of an integrated and multi-lateral strategy.

It must be accompanied by proper management requirements.

These requirements must be followed by hard guarantees from the countries involved: guarantees that the funding made available by cancelling debts is used to fight poverty; guarantees that the funding will no longer be used to finance arms deals and other military activities.

Mr Da Costa, that is not neo-colonialism in my book.

It is making sure that the funds of the European taxpayer are not misused to fund wars - crazy wars - in Africa.

Conditionality requires courage and - you will have to forgive me - more courage than the Member States and the Commission have displayed so far.

Mr President, as others have said, many promises have been made on debt relief but in fact very few have been delivered.

After all the headlines that we heard at Cologne last year, less than $13 billion of the $100 billion promised has actually been cancelled and as the Commission and the Council have told us, contributions to the HIPC Trust Fund are still way below target.

As the Commissioner rightly says, the burden deserves to be shared.

The fact is that despite a $1 trillion budget surplus over 10 years, President Clinton is not able to squeeze $210 million for HIPC out of Congress.

That is an appalling fact for us to take on board.

It is also the case that we are still waiting for the World Bank and the IMF to come up with something similar to the European Union.

All G7 countries have promised some form of 100% debt cancellation, but many of them are very slow and disinclined to do it in the way that we would like.

Also, to qualify for debt relief, each country has to complete a long and often contradictory 'HIPC' process, and only 5 countries have so far managed to go through the hoops that they are being asked to go through.

So far, the United Kingdom is the only country that has offered 100% debt cancellation.

France, Germany and Japan only include pre-cut-off debts and so ignore a significant portion of debt.

Japan, incidentally, ties its debt relief to responsibility to buy Japanese exports.

On Mozambique, for instance, it is very significant that the IMF, the World Bank and the Paris Club only postponed payments from Mozambique and then actually lent more money.

So, what I would say, finally, is that we in this Parliament urge all the creditors to stop delaying and to start working really hard towards fulfilling full debt cancellation for the poorest countries.

Of course, I agree with all my colleagues, the poorest countries who fulfil the criteria of delivering debt relief to those countries that show a commitment to social sector and human development support.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I think that it has become quite clear today that the situation referred to in the question is of great concern and has attracted the Council' s attention.

This is essentially an issue on which there is a degree of agreement, particularly within the European Union.

The Portuguese Presidency of the European Union has furthermore taken care to include this issue in its working programme and has ensured that it was a key part of the agenda of the Cairo Euro-African summit.

This issue must, however, be considered calmly and carefully, without any histrionics, given the serious situation that the populations of the highly indebted countries find themselves in.

The fundamental issue of debt is not the central issue for these countries - the main issue is their development, and this is the key point behind all this.

We must all be aware that what is currently at stake is the global debate on general development policy and, in particular, on the role of the European Union and its Member States in defining this policy at world level.

This is the crucial issue: debt is a symptom but underdevelopment is the disease.

There are indeed problems of inequality and of the uneven distribution of wealth in these countries, but these problems must be overcome through political solutions.

I spoke just now about the temptation or tendency to adopt a neo-colonial approach, but I was by no means implying that some aid conditions - a subject which is in fact influenced by the current philosophy behind ACP-EU cooperation - are not perfectly legitimate and acceptable.

What we must not forget is that there is a code of conduct for the internal management of resource allocation, and in particular for resources released for these countries as debt relief.

We must be reasonably careful to find a way to respect the right of these countries' governments to manage these funds.

We must understand that we have to endeavour to ensure that political conditionality and the strengthening of democracy in these countries are the key factors underpinning our action.

Working towards good governance and working towards strengthening democratic structures and political participation are vital factors in creating free societies which provide for better management of internal resources and more appropriate management of wealth distribution and, in particular, which do not encourage corruption and the siphoning-off of funds.

It is our opinion that these issues are fundamentally linked to development.

As I said, the issue of debt is a symptom of a much more global issue, namely development.

I think that the European Union and the Member States have demonstrated that they are mindful of the problems in this field and that they have concrete measures to propose in order to address them.

Mr President, I wish to begin by commenting on the necessity of conditionality.

I agree with a number of the contributions here.

I would also say that what we are facing here is not a tighter regime of conditionality than what Member States are actually pursuing in their bilateral development cooperation, as nowadays it is necessary to ensure that the use of resources corresponds to the goals that are set.

If we look at the substance, it is also the link to focusing better on social aspects in the HIPC countries - that is the key to what they have to do.

There is also evidence of this being taken up by the World Bank and the IMF, with those institutions coming on board in terms of giving priority to these aspects.

In a way, one could say that we are witnessing a move from the Washington consensus to the Copenhagen consensus.

The good part of this is that the IMF, with the poverty reduction strategy papers, is aligning itself with the goals the World Bank set a few years ago.

All this shows that the fight against poverty is at the centre of this effort.

So the combination of keeping the focus on perhaps narrowly defined HIPC countries and looking at the social consequences inside those countries is quite reasonable.

I turn to the matter of whether too few countries are part of the initiative.

It would be wrong to think that we could simply broaden its scope and welcome all developing countries to it.

There would be a number of adverse effects if we did so.

Firstly, the cost of the HIPC initiative would increase dramatically because the wealthier these countries are, or the less poor, the bigger the debt they have acquired.

So it must be borne in mind that this has to do with helping the poorest countries to determine those areas in which they can manage the remaining debt.

The idea was never to cancel all debt from the Third World countries because that was totally impracticable.

We are at a level of 0.22% or 0.23% for official development assistance, far from the 0.7% target that in principle everybody has agreed to and which only a limited number of countries have actually reached.

The 350bn would not be a manageable figure, and also the value for the poorest countries would be watered down if it were shared amongst the less poor middle-income countries.

I would say to Mrs Schörling that almost all money for HIPC is found from the existing development budgets.

This is also the case for the billion of EDF money we are reallocating.

The nice thing about it is that the ACP countries accepted it, and this is a reallocation that moves money from the relatively better-off to the poorest countries in the ACP group.

So we are doing something very concrete by improving the poverty focus of our general activity in this reallocation.

That part of it is highly welcome.

The good thing is that we had the money so we were able to do something of real value as the only donor around, except for a few elite donors who are trying to shame the rest by moving forward and setting a good example - the usual gang.

Otherwise, the European Union is the only one able to do something of real value.

Finally, I welcome very much the way this debate has gone.

Parliament's interest is an important asset for the European Union.

I have received five motions for resolutions, pursuant to Rule 42(5) of the Rules of Procedure.

The vote will take place on Thursday at 12 noon.

The next item is the statements by the Commission and the Council on the situation in Zimbabwe.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the present pre-election campaign period in Zimbabwe continues to be marked by a climate of intimidation towards the opposition and a lack of respect for the law and for citizens' rights, sometimes with tragic consequences.

The situation has been growing worse despite considerable international efforts, particularly by the European Union, to persuade President Mugabe to order the so-called 'veterans' to leave the farmers' properties that they have invaded immediately, so as to guarantee the safety of all citizens, and in particular foreign nationals resident in Zimbabwe.

The European Union is deeply concerned at the situation in Zimbabwe and the Council has published two Presidency statements, on 13 March and on 7 May, in which it expressed its grave concern at the situation.

All of the European Union' s candidate countries, as well as the countries of the European Economic Area, have given their backing to these statements.

Various meetings have also been held with the government of Zimbabwe, at the Council' s initiative.

As for the fundamental issue behind the current crisis - land - the European Union has continued to state its willingness to help Zimbabwe to implement a redistribution of farmland which is compatible with respect for property rights and, in particular, with the principles and conclusions of the Donors Conference on Land Reform and Resettlement in Zimbabwe, held in Harare in 1998.

With regard to the forthcoming parliamentary elections in Zimbabwe, which have been set for 24 and 25 June, it is more vital than ever for them to be held in a free, fair and transparent way and within the deadline that has been set.

International observers should be present at these elections so that they can observe how the elections proceed and vouch for the final result of the vote and for the legitimacy that the elections need, and guarantee that the result is accepted by the international community.

To this end, the European Union is prepared to send a mission of election observers, but must, of course, warn the Zimbabwean authorities of the need for satisfactory guarantees that the observers will be safe and that they will have freedom of access to all relevant premises.

The Troika of European Union Heads of Mission in Harare will personally convey this message to the Zimbabwean authorities.

The Commission representatives will travel there on Friday 19 May to prepare for the mission of election observers in order to verify that the appropriate conditions have been met.

Next Monday, the General Affairs Council will consider the Commission representatives' report on their visit.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, let me remind you that Zimbabwe is a partner of the European Union under the Lomé Convention, and that Zimbabwe must respect the principles enshrined in that convention, which form the basis of the European Union's cooperation policy.

The European Union will continue to follow developments in that country in the light of these principles and will not fail to draw the necessary conclusions in the event that these principles are not adhered to.

The Commission is concerned about the evolving situation in Zimbabwe.

Zimbabwe, for decades a stable country, is now going through an increasingly severe economic and political crisis.

Parliamentary elections have now been announced by the government for 24 and 25 June.

The pursuance of illegal farm occupations, continued violence, death, injuring and intimidation of the opposition are being interpreted as part of the ruling party' s electoral campaign.

Recent weeks have witnessed a series of international initiatives to facilitate the holding of free and fair elections.

The General Affairs Council of 10 April urged the government of Zimbabwe to create the conditions to hold free and fair elections.

The Commission continues to urge the government of Zimbabwe to hold elections, free of intimidation.

I had a very direct conversation with President Mugabe at the EU-Africa Summit.

I followed this up with a letter to him this week.

Following the EU Member States' agreement in the Azores on 6 and 7 May, the Commission this week has a mission in Zimbabwe to look at necessary arrangements for an EU observer team and to coordinate with other election observation initiatives by SADC, the Commonwealth and the US.

The Commission has already provided EUR 220 000 for the training of 1 440 Zimbabwean election observers and has made available another EUR 6 million to support initiatives from civil society, including on good governance and democratisation.

The Commission electoral assessment mission now in Zimbabwe is discussing with Member States arrangements to deal with the logistical and operational aspects of this exercise, in particular, funding, freedom of movement and security of service.

EU observers are not being sent to legitimise an electoral process so far marked by intimidation and violence.

However, international observers could play an important role in deterring violence and building confidence, especially in the rural areas.

A preliminary EU proposal currently being developed would see the deployment of 150 observers, 100 of whom would be deployed in the first week of June to observe the electoral campaign and the rest to augment the EU' s observation of the vote and the count.

Consultations with the government, coordination with other international observer missions, such as the Commonwealth, US and Norway, and with local observation initiatives are on-going.

Acknowledging the long experience of the European Parliament in election observation, we invite representatives to participate.

With respect to development cooperation, the Commission is maintaining its European Development Fund poverty alleviation aid directed through the social sectors of health, education and rural development and, in particular, to combat the HIV/Aids epidemic.

These poverty alleviation programmes facilitate the pursuance of dialogue with civil society and provide an appropriate political signal.

The international community, while condemning certain governmental actions, still supports the people of Zimbabwe.

Given the government' s poor macroeconomic performance, the EU, like the IMF and the World Bank, has already frozen structural adjustment support.

On the question of the possible suspension of Zimbabwe's privileges under the Lomé Convention, there could be grounds for suspension if the Commission considers, after consulting thoroughly with Member States, that this would not be counterproductive at this stage before the elections.

We fear it would be manipulated and interpreted as a collective reaction orchestrated by what are polemically called 'former colonial powers' against Zimbabwe and its government.

In the worst scenario, if respect for the rule of law further deteriorates or if the elections were to be flawed, the Commission would have to consider whether Zimbabwe merits the privileges accorded under the Lomé Convention.

Suspension of these privileges would be economically crippling for Zimbabwe and would aggravate the crisis. But so far I believe we have followed the right course.

Mr President, I suppose I can start on a note of slight optimism in that President Mugabe has now named the days for the election as 24 and 25 June.

But on the down side, he is increasing all the army and civil servants' pay as a straight bribe.

I sincerely hope that Members of this Parliament will have the chance to act as observers, as these elections must be seen to have been free, fair and transparent in the atmosphere of fear that President Mugabe has created.

Only last month we passed a resolution in this Chamber condemning violence, calling for the return to full democracy and for free and fair elections to be held.

Some of these demands have now hopefully been implemented, but not before another white farmer had been murdered.

We all accept that there must be a redistribution of the best land in Zimbabwe, but this must be done through round table negotiations, and not with the violent acts we have seen over the last few months.

President Mugabe has now set up a committee of white farmers and Mugabe supporters, hopefully to reach a sensible agreement on land redistribution.

President Mugabe should never forget the economic damage that will be done to Zimbabwe' s economy if land redistribution simply means the land goes back to subsistence farming in small blocks.

There are few people in the rabble we have seen invading farms who could afford the employees, the machinery, seeds and fertilisers to farm these units to give a potential export output.

I have seen some of the farms that were reclaimed some years ago by Mr Mugabe and most of the fertile productive land has reverted to bush and the buildings and farmhouses are now crumbling ruins.

What a waste in a country dependent on agricultural exports!

Over the last few years, there has been a move to persuade political leaders in African regions to carry more responsibility for conflict prevention.

It was, therefore, gratifying to hear Nelson Mandela criticising the policies of the Zimbabwe president who is destroying his country.

I am sorry that President Mbeki, his successor, who is probably the most powerful leader in Africa, has not in public condemned the violence in Zimbabwe.

We in Parliament are right to call on the Commission to review its development cooperation with Zimbabwe if transparent elections are not held or if the opposition wins and the violence continues.

The use of Article 366 should be considered.

The World Bank has now cut funding because of debt arrears and Zimbabwe, as a country, is in liquidation.

We can but live and hope that a peaceful conclusion can be reached in Zimbabwe as it is the people themselves who are suffering most in this unstable situation the country finds itself in.

I have to say at the outset that I am extremely encouraged by the fact that the Commission has worked out such a very clear strategy for dealing with these very critical weeks before the election takes place.

I particularly welcome the fact that we are training domestic observers - I think that is very important and will offset the likelihood of Mugabe criticising us for coming in in a neo-colonialist way to interfere in his election.

I also welcome the fact that we will be supporting civil society' s objectives in these next few weeks.

I very much hope, Commissioner, that we will disseminate this kind of information in Zimbabwe because those people trying to mount an opposition campaign will be heartened by the kind of information that we have had from you today and I think that would be important.

One of the things I want to talk about briefly is the role of the state-controlled media in the run-up before the election.

The Commissioner did not mention this, but it would be sensible to do so because TV, radio and state-owned newspapers in Zimbabwe are acting now as if they were the agents of Zanu-PF.

All reporting of opposition parties is negative, with the MDC a particular target.

I would really like to know what we can do from the European Union to try to ensure that the opposition groups - and there are 26 parties standing in the election - have some access to the media.

State-controlled media, Commissioner, is refusing to take paid advertising even from the main NGOs who are just working to support the electoral process and democracy in Zimbabwe, or from any opposition parties.

Only three independent newspapers are carrying any kind of adverts from parties other than Zanu-PF so that only the claims of the government are being read or seen by the people and that has to be a contradiction if we are talking about providing democracy.

The fact is that the independent press does not have the print capacity to deal with demand.

The deaths and injuries in the rural areas and increasingly in the towns are deeply worrying.

Zanu-PF has the government resources, and the MDC supporters are too afraid to donate money.

I even read in the British press that Kabila and Qadhafi are giving money now to Mugabe' s campaign, which is a bit frightening.

It is deeply worrying that the opposition are fighting their campaign on Zanu-PF grounds.

They have no control over the electoral roll, they have no control over the polling stations that will be run by government civil servants.

This is wrong because the role of these government civil servants in the last referendum was very dubious indeed.

The people understand that and are aware of it.

There is evidence also of this Fifth Brigade being involved in pre-election crackdowns.

The Fifth Brigade were responsible for the brutality that Mugabe perpetuated in Matabeleland in the 80s. That also is something that worries me and I would like the EU to look into it.

Finally, President, let us be sure that we work as a European Union to create the conditions which will allow the people of Zimbabwe to express their choices in this election in June and express their choices in secret and without fear.

Mr President, why have so many African freedom fighters who we admired so much ended up as power-crazed potentates?

Why have so few former colonies turned into constitutional states?

Where anarchy and lawlessness rule, the law of the most brutal party applies.

In Zimbabwe, this takes the form of Mr Mugabe.

Where this country used to be a model for the Third World of how things should be done, it has now degenerated into its own opposite.

It is ruled by a dictator who deems his own power and privileges more important than the lack of stability of his country and the suffering of his own people.

Land reform is necessary, of course.

The possession of land in Zimbabwe still reflects the old colonial relations and this will, needless to say, cause tension.

But for years, Mr Mugabe himself had the opportunity to carry out this land reform, even with foreign help.

The question is therefore: what mala fide reasons are behind Mr Mugabe' s doing nothing initially and then, just before the elections, getting his cronies to cause havoc in the farms of the white people?

According to the Zimbabwean election monitors, the incessant violence renders free and fair elections impossible.

As long as this is the case, the election date has to be postponed.

A situation whereby Mr Mugabe legitimises his position through violence and intimidation must be avoided at all costs.

It would be a positive step if MEPs acted as observers during these elections and included Mugabe' s pre-electoral machinery in their assessment.

If the elections are not conducted fairly, European aid will need to be postponed.

But the cooperation according to Lomé cannot continue if Mugabe also renders elections impossible.

A further deterioration of the situation in Zimbabwe could have far-reaching effects on the African continent in general, and on South Africa in particular.

The Zimbabwean population deserves a far better government than it has at the moment.

It is high time that the European Union spoke very clear language.

Our patience with African leaders whose heroic deeds only take the form of abuse of power is running out.

Mr President, I too would like to start by welcoming the Commission' s strategy for the run-up to the election that has just been set out by the Commissioner and, in particular, the training of the Zimbabwean election monitors.

The black people of Zimbabwe are still suffering under the legacy of colonialism.

Cecil Rhodes, one of Britain's most successful colonists, said the purpose of colonialism was: "To find new lands in which we can easily obtain raw materials and at the same time exploit the cheap labour that is available from the natives of the colonies" .

The legacy of this barbarically successful strategy can be seen in the chaos that is happening in Zimbabwe today.

Today, just 4 000 white farmers still own over 70% of the arable land while more than seven million black Zimbabweans scratch a living from overcrowded communal areas.

We condemn the violence but we also see that black Zimbabweans have a compelling case.

This makes President Mugabe' s refusal to proceed with the lawful land redistribution programme even more deplorable.

It is a fearsomely difficult problem when Mugabe will not negotiate.

But I call on the UK Government to do all they can to persuade Zimbabwe to set up an independent arbitration board fully representative of the landless people and, once it is set up, perhaps with the assistance of the Commonwealth, to resume financial aid as soon as possible.

The British Government must recognise the moral debt owed for crimes of slavery and colonialism and continue to do all in its power to support a peaceful and progressive settlement to the land issues in Zimbabwe.

Mr President, the story of Zimbabwe is one of hope turning to despair - hope that in 1980 Zimbabwe could have realised its full potential and become a leading country in Africa; despair now because the father of the nation has reduced his creation from being one of the richest and most educated of African countries to being one of the poorest.

It is a truly remarkable achievement and a case study of mismanagement in recent history.

I am sure Mr Mugabe' s place in history books is now secured for all the wrong reasons.

Today the country is suffering from 50% unemployment and 60% inflation; he is spending USD 1 million a day on a foreign adventure in the Congo; the foreign exchange reserves have gone and the World Bank has suspended funding on projects.

I was astonished to hear the speech just given by my colleague from the Greens.

Yet out of despair comes resolution, determination and hope.

The country is one of the most educated in Africa and the European Union should be proud of its role in helping to set up that educational support structure in the past 20 years.

It has a functioning civic institution and culture.

Elections are due and voter rolls are being prepared but those voter rolls must be verified before the election.

The opposition parties want more transparency.

Twenty people have been killed and more than 1 200 farms illegally occupied.

Mr Mugabe has lost control of the country, presiding over lawlessness and corruption.

On 24 June elections are going to be held.

Yesterday, the Commonwealth Secretary-General said that it is still possible to have free elections.

The future of the country lies with the young people of Zimbabwe.

They must be given a chance. It is their future.

One thing we must do is to change the culture that is prevalent in Africa today that the winner takes all.

We must stop this winner-takes-all culture that every African country has, and I mean every country.

We must be seen to have free and fair elections and to demonstrate that they have been fair and free.

Mr President, the view shared by virtually all speakers is that the only ray of hope at the moment in Zimbabwe' s anarchy is the fact that elections will be held soon.

I agree with all speakers who said that we need to ensure that those elections are held as fairly as possible, which will not be easy.

I found the words of Commissioner Nielson encouraging when he said that, as early as the beginning of July, observers will be sent to Zimbabwe.

I think that this is vital because those who are not kindly disposed towards the Mugabe regime, those in opposition, will clearly need protection.

I would therefore like to back up the Commission in this opinion.

Observers need to be sent to Zimbabwe at the earliest opportunity, today if possible, rather than tomorrow.

Another worrying development is the reaction of the neighbouring countries.

From Europe, we have fought for years to establish racial equality, equal opportunities, democracy, etc. in Southern Africa.

At the moment, there is a deadly silence in the neighbouring countries which, in my opinion, is a very ominous development.

I therefore hold the view that, if the elections in Zimbabwe were not fair, for whatever reason, the Commission should continue with the course it set a moment ago.

If there are clear signs of large-scale fraud and Mugabe remains in power illegally, then, according to the provisions of the Lomé Convention, aid must be halted.

If the Commission were not to do this, the illegal dispossessions of land could spread to the rest of Southern Africa and this would be a disaster, not only for the area concerned, but also for the rest of Africa.

We must avoid this at all costs.

Mr President, I want to address the President of free Zimbabwe, Robert Mugabe, personally, together with his government and socialist-oriented party, Zanu-PF.

Hatred, President Mugabe, is not something upon which a society can be built.

Threats can never create confidence and social harmony.

Lawlessness can never create security and human solidarity.

Violence and murder can never be reconciled with the Christian view of human beings which I know that you, President Mugabe, have grown up with and embraced.

The churches of Zimbabwe, the Lutheran World Federation and the World Council of Churches appeal to your conscience.

My home country of Sweden has supported Zimbabwe very persistently and in very concrete ways, both in developing its economy and in its struggle to be a free and democratic country founded upon the equal, unique and inviolable value of human life, irrespective of the colour of a person' s skin.

Since independence in 1980, Sweden has provided a total of SEK 2 billion in aid, corresponding to USD 220 million.

Twenty years ago, the Church of Sweden' s youth movement, which I myself was active in, embarked upon a special venture which we called 'Be a Friend of Zimbabwe' .

Enthusiastic young people from our two countries met.

We believed in you, President Mugabe, and in your country' s future because you wanted to uphold the Christian view of human beings in Zimbabwe.

We want to believe in you again, even though a lot of bad things have happened.

Do it for the sake of your own reputation, both now and in the future.

Do it for the sake of Zimbabwe' s citizens, and do it for the sake of Africa.

First in answer to Mrs Kinnock - we are indeed in close contact with civil society.

Civil society represents a hope of achieving a civilised society.

But there is some way to go right now.

We are also in direct contact with the opposition.

We make a point of getting in contact with all players in a very visible and clear way.

We are urging the Mugabe government to accept that pluralism must be there to stay, and this is also the point of sending in the observers.

I hope we can solve the problems of funding of the observer mission.

I have to tell Parliament that this once again demonstrates the inadequacy of our system.

We cannot just push a button somewhere in our system and the funds appear.

It is highly complicated to find the money for this in time.

This is the kind of system we have.

Yesterday' s discussion about the external relations reform is even today relevant.

At least we have excellent coordination on the ground in Zimbabwe with the Member States, which is very helpful.

Let me finally explain to you what we are doing on the ground even in this situation.

We are deciding on a EUR 19 million grant for very targeted poverty alleviation in Zimbabwe via a microproject scheme, part of which will be used to support resettlement of the poorest people on legally acquired land.

This will demonstrate in practice how land should be redistributed - in marked contrast to what is going on in Zimbabwe right now.

I have received six motions for resolutions, pursuant to Rule 37(2) of the Rules of Procedure.

The vote will take place tomorrow, Thursday, at 12 noon.

The next item is Question Time (B5-0220/2000).

We will examine questions to the Council.

I would like to remind you that we are 20 minutes behind schedule.

It is not possible to extend work beyond 7.00 p.m. because the representative of the Council has an official meeting at 7.05 p.m. with the Parliamentary contact group to discuss the statute of the MEPs.

That is very important work, it is already scheduled and we must work as quickly as possible so that the maximum number of questions can be answered.

The rest will be replied to in writing.

Subject: Undesirable persons in Turkey The Turkish newspaper 'Sabah' has published a list of 56 persons considered undesirable in Turkey.

The list includes numerous political representatives from several European Union countries (Denmark, Italy, Greece, Sweden and Spain) and also from non-Member States, together with a large number of journalists, clergymen, members of humanitarian organisations etc. Despite the uproar caused by this list, the Turkish Government has not denied its existence.

As maintaining a list of undesirable persons constitutes an unacceptable and undemocratic act on the part of the Turkish Government, does the Council intend to look into the issue and to intervene with the Turkish Government at once to ask for the list to be scrapped?

Mr President, I shall try to answer the questions as briefly as possible, although the brevity of my answers does not reflect the Council' s genuine desire to give answers to this House that are as comprehensive as possible.

It is indeed true that information has appeared in a Turkish newspaper about a list of people considered to be undesirable in Turkey.

This issue was specifically raised by the Presidency at the Association Council meeting between the European Union and Turkey on 11 April 2000. I would like to say that the Turkish Foreign Minister, Mr Schem, has stated officially that no such list exists, which is why, in the light of an official statement like this, we feel that we should not continue to insist on this point.

If, by any chance, the Turkish authorities were to take any action that might suggest a contradiction of what the Turkish Foreign Minister has told us, the Council would, of course, act accordingly.

- (EL) I should like to thank the President-in-Office, both because the question was raised and for his reply.

I hope that this is in fact the case.

I should like to use the opportunity which I have to ask a second supplementary question and the occasion of the presence here of the husband and son of Leila Zana, who was awarded the European Parliament' s Sakharov prize, to ask the minister the following question: does he not think that before assuming the Portuguese Presidency, he should have raised the matter of the release of a lady member of parliament honoured by our very own House with the Sakharov prize for her fight for human rights now that Turkey wishes to draw closer to, and integrate into, the European Union?

Should the Council and the presidency not have made a move to help Leila Zana?

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the decisions of the Helsinki European Council led to Turkey being considered as a candidate for accession to the European Union.

It was agreed that, following this decision, an accession strategy would be established, which naturally includes strict monitoring of what the European Union regards as essential reforms. This relates in particular to the area of human rights, which, in the light of the Copenhagen criteria, are essential for the accession of any country to the European Union.

The Council will monitor all of these issues and will not fail, whenever necessary, to convey any information to this House which is relevant to progress with this accession strategy and, in particular, its views on Turkey' s compliance with requirements for the future opening of accession negotiations by the European Union.

Mr President, on a point of order.

I attend Question Time nearly every time and every time the first question or two are from our colleagues in the Greek Communists and, in particular, Mr Alavanos.

You will notice that the date on this question is 30 March 2000, which was two weeks before the last part-session.

Therefore, in my view, it should not have been number one on the list but should have been on the last part-session' s list of questions.

There seems to be some system whereby Mr Alavanos and his colleagues always get the first and second questions, and they always attack Turkey.

I should like you to investigate why this should be.

Mr Purvis, I believe that we should not enter into any judgement of intentions.

I would like to point out - although you already know - that the President, together with her office, decides on the order of questions.

I do not know whether Mr Alavanos has so much influence with the Presidency of Parliament.

What I can tell you is that it is not the Greek Communist Party but Synaspismos.

However, we shall continue with our agenda.

I will take good note of your question.

Subject: Dispute between Armenia and Turkey On 11 December 1999 the Council accepted Turkey' s application for accession to the European Union.

Paragraph 3 of Parliament' s resolution of 18 June 1987 'Calls on the Council to obtain from the present Turkish Government an acknowledgement of the genocide perpetrated against the Armenians in 1915-1917 and to promote the establishment of a dialogue between Turkey and the representatives of the Armenians' .

Turkey has not acknowledged the genocide in question and is still imposing its economic blockade on Armenia.

What action has the Council taken to encourage the development of political relations between Armenia and Turkey?

Is the Council considering lifting the embargo as one of the indispensable conditions for Turkey' s accession to the European Union?

Mr President, I should also like to thank the President-in-Office of the Council for his answer.

I must, however, regretfully inform him that his answer was still particularly vague, as my question referred to a European Parliament resolution adopted in 1987, in which, effectively, we officially recognised events such as the genocide of the Armenians between 1915 and 1917.

We do not, however, know today what measures have been taken by successive Councils in order to attempt to establish relations between both these countries, given that today Turkey is still imposing an economic blockade on Armenia.

My question is therefore as follows: in the context of negotiations with a view to Turkey' s accession to the European Union, has the issue of this blockade been raised, and could lifting this blockade be counted a precondition to Turkey' s accession?

The honourable Member has asked two questions. The first concerns the 1987 resolution on acknowledging the genocide in 1915-1917 and the second question basically concerns political relations between Armenia and Turkey.

With regard to the first question, these issues are obviously open to political interpretation, although they are based on a historical assumption which we all acknowledge and which is extremely important, but which is not a precondition for reopening dialogue with Turkey.

With regard to relations between Armenia and Turkey, which we hope will be positive in future, all that the European Union has done is to try to ensure that Turkey complies with the European Union' s normal framework of external relations.

This framework includes good relations with Armenia, especially on trade matters.

These good relations and the whole framework for cooperation on which they are based are part of the acquis communautaire that Turkey must accept.

Nevertheless, at international level, we cannot force countries to maintain good relations with one another, as these cannot be imposed by decree.

They must result from a political decision. Turkey must practically demonstrate that no matter how it views the situation in Armenia, if it wishes to open negotiations with the European Union and if it wishes to join the European Union, it will, of course, have to respect the whole framework of good relations that the European Union enjoys with Armenia.

This has, until now, been a purely bilateral issue and the European Union cannot, therefore, intervene in it.

Subject: EU-Jordan Association Agreement Would the Council please list those Member States which have still to ratify the EU-Jordan Association Agreement and advise what level of priority it is giving to encouraging them to speed up the process?

Mr President, in reply to this question, I think that in terms of day-to-day relations between the Council and the European Parliament, it would be useful if we could make full use of the facilities that the transparency process for Council information provides for all citizens, including Members of the European Parliament.

That is why I would like to suggest that those honourable Members who are interested in issues such as this should use the Council web page, which is updated daily, to ascertain the dates of signing and the position on ratification, adoption and entry into force of all agreements, and specifically the Mediterranean agreements such as the agreement with Jordan to which the honourable Member' s question refers.

On this point, the latest information I have is that eight countries have still not ratified the EU-Jordan Association Agreement.

As you will be aware, this is a matter for national parliaments, and they have the final say, as these are mixed agreements, in which there is a Community dimension and a national dimension.

It is obvious that we cannot interfere in the decisions of national parliaments. Nevertheless, we can and we must make representations to the governments of these countries, and I must say that the Portuguese Presidency intends, at the next informal meeting of Foreign Ministers on the Euro-Mediterranean process, to highlight the importance of making the parliaments of these countries aware of the need to ratify this agreement in particular, as well as other agreements which still remain to be ratified.

I would, however, like to mention an issue that is often overlooked.

This is that given that there is a Community dimension to these agreements, and that this dimension concerns trade, the entry into force of these agreements would normally be preceded by a Commission decision.

And the Commission has, in fact, as it has done with regard to other Euro-Mediterranean agreements, already brought into force unilateral measures for dismantling customs tariffs, which will provide products from Jordan with easy and swift access to the Community market.

Mr President, I wish to begin by saying how delighted I am that the presidency is prepared to put some pressure on the governments which, in turn, I hope will put pressure on their parliaments to proceed with ratification.

It is quite shaming that after well over six months there are eight Member States still to ratify.

The Jordanians are particularly sensitive to the slow pace of progress.

Commissioner Patten is determined to reinvigorate the whole Barcelona process and the European-Mediterranean relationship.

I hope that the Council will follow that lead and ensure that this is transmitted down through the governments to the Member State parliaments.

Could he give me some assurance that the Council gives Mr Patten its full support in what he is trying to do in the Mediterranean area?

Mr President, with regard to the latter part of Mr Purvis' s question, actions in the Mediterranean area have been one of the Portuguese Presidency' s priorities.

The Portuguese Presidency also intends to continue the very thorough work that has been done to establish the joint strategy for the Mediterranean, and it has developed various initiatives in this area.

Specifically, with regard to the agreement with Jordan, even though we acknowledge and regret the fact that the agreement is not yet in force, previous experience has shown that these agreements take around three years to be ratified.

The most rapidly ratified agreement was the agreement with Tunisia, which was signed in July 1995, and which came into force in March 1998; it therefore took just under three years.

Our experience with all the other agreements is that they took around three years and I think that the pace of the agreement with Jordan is more or less standard.

This depends to a large extent on national parliaments. Nevertheless, the Portuguese Presidency will certainly make the various governments aware of this issue.

As the author is not present, Question No 4 lapses.

Subject: Culture and the WTO The Portuguese Presidency has emphasised the role of culture in the European project and has linked it, in particular, to the need to clarify the European strategy for the future WTO Round.

Will the Council now make a statement on the issue?

Mr President, I gather that this question refers to the issue of culture within the WTO.

As you will be aware, when the Council' s mandate for the Seattle Summit was being prepared, many Member States were particularly careful to stress cultural aspects and, above all, the European Union' s need to adopt a very firm position in these negotiations on protecting the specific nature of culture.

I would therefore remind you that in the conclusions of the Council meeting on 26 October on the preparation of the Seattle Ministerial Conference, the idea was expressed that during the forthcoming WTO negotiations, the Union would try to ensure, as it did in the Uruguay Round, that the Member States which comprise the Community would be able to preserve their cultural diversity by maintaining their own cultural and audiovisual policies.

Honourable Members will be as aware as I am of the fate that befell the launch of the new round of WTO negotiations in Seattle, which has, of course, led to delays in addressing issues of this kind.

Nevertheless, it is worth noting that within the specific framework of the GATT agreement, that is, of the General Agreement on Trade in Services, it was specified that negotiations on the so-called built-in agenda would have to begin on 1 January 2000.

These negotiations have begun, but there has been no substantial change of position so far - which is something of an understatement - with regard to progress on these issues, given that this whole process is obviously linked to the start of the overall negotiating process.

I can also tell you that the Council believes that there is no way that a satisfactory start can be made to the process this year.

I wish to thank the President-in-Office for his response.

The reason for asking the question is that we have in our own ideologies many different models at a European Union level which are unique to the European Union as a whole: many times we speak of the European model of agriculture or the European social model, and so on. In particular, with regard to things like audiovisual, we had a discussion today in Parliament on the Randzio-Plath report on transparency and financial dealings between undertakings and state aid.

There is a huge threat now to cultural diversity within the European Union because of the import of programmes from America and globalisation even of food chains like McDonalds.

That is constantly undermining what is unique not only about Europe as a continent but also about the individual Member States.

I hope that you and your colleagues will be vigilant in ensuring that we have the opportunity to maintain that diversity, as it adds to what essentially the core of Europe is all about.

I would like to offer Mr Crowley certain assurances.

We will continue to address the issue of preserving national identity and the need to maintain a set of instruments which, without in any way distorting the competition rules, can, in some way, ensure that the core values of European identity will be preserved. This applies both to the overall position adopted by the Council, which will, of course, remain the focal point of the negotiations conducted by the Commission on behalf of the Union during the next round, and also at national level.

The position I have described reflects Portugal' s view of this matter, and I believe that my country is not alone in its approach to this issue.

Mr President, the WTO deals primarily with issues pertaining to the opening up of markets. For example, there is a discussion on-going at the moment about China, and whether our European manufacturers are to have access to the textile market as well.

It is a market worth billions and could create many new jobs here in Europe, particularly when one considers that the only possession many Chinese have to their name is a pair of trousers.

The cultural question I would most like to hear answered though, is this: how are we proposing to handle the language issue in future?

France pursues a very independent policy where the French language is concerned.

Do you see any evidence of similar tendencies on the part of the Germans, Spanish or Portuguese?

Are we going to take an even-handed approach in this respect or will we form an assessment on a country-by-country basis, taking into account the respective size of population?

I would be very happy to answer the honourable Member if I had any idea at the moment of how the debate on this issue will proceed.

I nevertheless believe that the Council intends to highlight these different national approaches, which reflect the very diverse nature of the European Union.

And as regards my own country at least, there is considerable concern that these cultural issues, and specifically the language dimension, should be the very top priority in the discussions that the European Union will be holding with its WTO partners.

As the authors are not present, Question Nos 6 and 7 lapse.

Subject: EU agriculture budget paying for the UN mission in Kosovo Will the EU use appropriations from the agriculture budget to pay for the UN mission to Kosovo?

Mr President, with regard to the previous questions, I think that when it comes to agriculture, the actions of the Portuguese Presidency are sufficiently eloquent to have answered the honourable Member' s question - even in his absence.

Turning to the question about financing our policy in Kosovo through the agricultural budget, I must make it absolutely clear that the United Nations mission in Kosovo cannot possibly be financed from agricultural budget headings, since there is no appropriate legal basis for this.

The current financial regulations do not allow for appropriations to be transferred between two headings in the financial perspectives.

This does not necessarily mean that there is no intention, as specifically announced by the Commission, to propose an amendment to the 2000-2006 financial perspectives which, in the Commission' s view, would not fundamentally affect CAP appropriations.

The Council is currently studying this issue, which is highly controversial.

We know that in this House, too, a majority is against a review of the financial perspectives which would lead to a reduction in the amount available for the common agricultural policy.

Nevertheless, I repeat that the Commission has stated that there is absolutely no danger of direct aid to farmers being reduced and that this is simply a question of taking advantage of savings essentially flowing from changes in the euro/dollar exchange rate. These savings will be extrapolated over the next two years.

Furthermore, the Commission considers that the post-2002 review of the CAP, which was, as you know, agreed in the Berlin European Council conclusions, will provide a basis for further savings.

But as I have said, the Council' s position on this issue is, in political terms, to oppose a review of the financial perspectives.

The Council considers that a very thorough assessment must be carried out of the requirements of the Balkans and of the real ability of the people there to absorb these funds, particularly bearing in mind and focusing very closely on the role of the European Union as one of the international funding agencies in this area. This request has already been made to the Commission and to the High Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy.

We have therefore asked the Commission to provide a schedule showing the indicative distribution of all the contributions that have been pledged, divided into those components which are donations and those which are loans.

The Council feels that it is only on the basis of this kind of information that an accurate assessment of the Commission' s proposals can be made.

It is precisely for this reason that the idea of a review of the financial perspectives is not being considered at present.

What the President-in-Office of the Council has just said completely contradicts what the Commissioner said yesterday, the day before yesterday and on previous occasions in this House.

The Council' s view is correct: payments to farmers are at stake.

It is truly outrageous that aid is not paid for nuts - which means they cannot continue to be grown - or that farmers are not being given what they are asking for: a reduction in diesel oil prices.

Nevertheless, what the Commission does is take funds intended for agriculture, and which have already been approved under Agenda 2000, at the Berlin Summit, as if there were a surplus, and divert them to foreign policy.

Although I am in favour of aid to Kosovo, I am not in favour - in fact I consider it an outrage - of taking money intended for agriculture, approved under Agenda 2000 - since if we do this it shows that it has been nothing but a smokescreen - and dedicating it to foreign policy.

My question is as follows: what do we do when the Council says something diametrically opposed to what the Commission says?

Mr President-in-Office of the Council, what do we do in this event?

If Parliament feels that there is a contradiction, it can address this contradiction by comparing it with reality, and the reality is that, contrary to what the honourable Member has just said, nowhere in my speech did I say that direct aid would suffer as a result of this redeployment of appropriations.

I must make it clear that the Commission has simply said that it would use available funds and that savings would be made in the common agricultural policy.

This does not mean that the Commission may not present proposals for the redeployment of appropriations, but rather that - as the Commission itself has continued to say - this will not affect direct aid to farmers either.

- (EL) Mr President, frankly the President-in-Office leaves me speechless.

First he assures us that no part of the CAP budget will be used for Kosovo or for exercising the European Union' s foreign policy and then he says that, in any case, the Commission has said - and rightly so - that any sums not taken up will be shared out.

In other words, part of the CAP budget will be redistributed.

We insist on knowing if the Council really believes that part of the agricultural budget, which has undergone swathing cutbacks for 2000, can be used for purposes which have absolutely nothing to do with the purposes for which the budget was approved.

Apart from our opposition to the entire policy being exercised by the European Union in Kosovo, the issue at stake is this: we want a commitment from the Council that not one single euro from the agricultural budget will be channelled elsewhere.

Our farmers are already being squeezed dry, their needs are tremendous, as we see on a daily basis, and it would be unacceptable to take money away from their already reduced budget.

Mr Korakas, I should like to begin by explaining that most of the appropriations allocated under the ACP framework have been granted through the European Development Fund and are extra-Community budget contributions. They come from the specific EDF budget, which is why I say that it would be rather difficult to transfer EDF appropriations to aid for Kosovo, because they are not part of the Community budget.

Furthermore, I would like to make one point quite clear: I explained that, at the moment, appropriations allocated to aid for Kosovo are unused CAP appropriations.

I repeat: they are unused CAP appropriations.

I would also like to say that, with regard to the Commission' s proposal, I stated quite clearly that currently there is not a universally positive attitude to changing the 2000-2006 financial perspectives in the Council.

The Council has taken the view that the internal balance of the financial perspectives should not be changed during this phase.

It is, however, also obvious that the Berlin European Council conclusions are relevant here, as they show that the financial perspectives for the period 2000-2006 provide for a mid-term review, specifically with regard to the common agricultural policy.

Perhaps it would be worthwhile for honourable Members to consider whether the common agricultural policy will ultimately be compatible with the outcome of the next WTO round.

The 2000-2006 financial perspectives also provide for a review, which will, for the first time in fact, be dealt with by a qualified majority, and I would also ask the House to bear this point in mind.

As the author is not present, Question No 9 lapses.

Subject: Financial assistance to European-level parties Replying to my oral question H-0268/00 in Parliament on 12 April 2000, the Commission took the view that:

'The present Article 191 of the Treaty establishing the EC does not constitute a legal basis for funding European political parties.

The article refers to the importance of political parties at European level.

It does not, however, empower any of the institutions to enter into expenditure commitments to support European political parties, nor does it provide for a procedure for approving any measure to facilitate the giving of such an expenditure commitment.

The Commission therefore considers that in the interests of legal certainty it would be best to incorporate an appropriate legal basis for such expenditure in the Treaty establishing the EC.

This matter should be considered at the Intergovernmental Conference.'

Does the Council take the same view with regard to the legal basis for this?

Will the matter be placed on the agenda for the IGC?

Mr President, as the honourable Member' s question states, it is true that Article 191 of the Treaty does not constitute a legal basis for the funding of European political parties.

This issue was studied at the Intergovernmental Conference that established the Treaty of Amsterdam, and it was considered at the time - and I say this as someone who was there representing the Portuguese Government - that there was not a majority, let alone unanimity, among the Member States in favour of creating a specific legal basis in this area.

As regards the Intergovernmental Conference, and particularly bearing in mind the speech made by the President of the European Parliament, Mrs Fontaine, at the IGC ministerial meeting on 10 April, this is an issue that the IGC will consider again.

I myself, as Chair of the preparatory group, intend to have this issue put on the IGC agenda once again by the end of the Portuguese Presidency.

In any event, I think that, at the moment, as there is no legal basis, all we can do is try to discover, through the various Member States participating in the IGC, whether or not there is a will to work towards funding for European political parties.

Mr President, I agree with Mr Seppänen on the legal basis being a primary concern, i.e. it must be in place before expenditure for this kind of support is entered into.

After this, the amount, type and form of support will surely be for Parliament and the Council to decide.

In this context, I would like to ask what kind of plans, if any, the Council has regarding these practical arrangements.

The report on Parliament' s financial administration, in which all political groups were criticised for having channelled parliamentary appropriations into European political parties also, did not take into account the fact, for example, that the office of the Party of European Socialists is situated within the European Parliament buildings, whereas my own group, the PPE, received a great deal of criticism despite the fact that our Party office is situated away from the European Parliament' s services.

I would therefore like to know whether any plans are afoot as to what might be incorporated in this support, which was jointly decided upon by Parliament and the Council, and what issues will be taken into consideration.

I would like to tell the President-in-Office of the Council and the honourable Members that we are discussing these issues within Parliament.

The question concerns the legal basis and the Intergovernmental Conference.

It is one of Parliament' s duties.

As the author is not present, Question No 11 lapses.

As the author is unwell, Question No 12 by Mr Bowis will be replied to in writing.

Subject: Turkish incursion into Iraq What view does the Council take of the new large-scale incursion into Iraq by a heavily armed section of the Turkish army?

(PT) We all know that the current situation in northern Iraq and, in particular, the fact that Baghdad is not sufficiently in control of the northern part of the country, are causing a political and even a military vacuum, which have led to Turkey taking direct action.

This results, de facto, from the fundamentally ambiguous situation in that area.

It is obvious that the European Union must oppose any actions that could involve the violation of other states' borders.

But I cannot comment on this issue, except to say that we will remain concerned about the territorial integrity of Iraq and that we believe that anything that could cause this territorial integrity to be violated is undesirable.

- (EL) Mr President, Mr President-in-Office, thank you for your reply.

You say that the situation is unclear and that there is a political and military vacuum. In other words, that Iraq does not control its northern area.

Now, forgive me Mr President-in-Office, but Iraq does not control its northern area because we do not let it and perhaps we are right not to.

But even if we do not let Iraq control its northern area, that does not mean that we have to put up with its being controlled by someone else.

What I am hearing is quite absurd.

I imagine that you are unable to defend whoever it is who takes the decisions there.

Except that, of course, they include members of the European Union.

Perhaps they could inform you of what is happening in the area and tell you, for example, why they are allowing other people to go into and take control of the northern area of Iraq, which they do not allow Iraq to control, i.e. let us not beat about the bush - why are they allowing military invasion?

I think that this situation is scandalous in every sense of the word from an international and political point of view and I wonder how you tolerate it.

I would just like to say that nothing I have said implies that the European Union is at all complacent about actions that Turkish troops may be involved in beyond Turkey' s borders.

Subject: European Charter for small companies In the context of creating a business environment conducive to entrepreneurship and innovation, the European Council has called for the drawing up of a European Charter for small companies.

Can the Council say that, in such a charter, it would support due recognition being given to the very specific nature of the fisheries sector, where such factors as seasonality need to be considered?

Mr President, I want to thank the President-in-Office for his reply and I am pleased that work is under way and in fact, near finalisation.

Hopefully, it will not be too long before we have details of the proposals.

I am also pleased that the President-in-Office has recognised that the engine of growth in the economy are the SMEs providing 70% of the jobs.

Therefore, it is blindingly obvious that SMEs will play an important role if we are to resolve the very high unemployment problems that we have generally in the Union and specifically in various regions of the Union.

I did ask a specific question about fisheries.

Of course, fisheries by their very nature create much-needed jobs in coastal regions of the Union.

Fisheries, unlike any other industry, depend so much on seasonality and weather factors.

Could the President confirm that the study which has been carried out would, even at this late stage, look at fisheries in isolation rather than look at fisheries in the global sense?

Mr Gallagher, I am sorry that I did not specifically mention your point about fisheries in my answer.

Nevertheless, in line with the understanding that there has been about addressing this issue on the part of both the Commission and the Council - and this issue will, for example, be considered by the Industry Council tomorrow - we acknowledge the very specific nature of the fisheries sector and we share your concern about the importance of small- and medium-sized enterprises operating in this sector.

This Charter is, however, a broad policy document and is generically aimed at all small- and medium-sized enterprises. It is not a document that lists measures to be adopted in each sector and assigns priorities to them.

The Charter is designed to create a universal regulatory framework for small- and medium-sized enterprises as defined at European level, and also to establish stages for implementing these measures.

There is no provision for defining sectoral measures that could be implemented at EU level once the Charter is approved, and this could only be done in a more technical document relating to the actual implementation of the Charter.

When I speak to small- and medium-sized enterprises, they are certainly pleased about the mood music that is coming out of the Council, but frankly they are a little sceptical as to whether the Charter will do anything constructive for them.

They think it is just another piece of paper saying how wonderful they are.

Can the President-in-Office tell us if this Charter will envisage new Community instruments being created to help small- and medium-sized enterprises.

For example, funds to help them with training, education, adaptation of premises or the use of new technology.

If so, can he also indicate that they will be as free as possible from bureaucracy because the other complaint one gets from small- and medium-sized enterprises is that the funds which already exist at European level are almost unobtainable because of the hoops that they have to jump through in order to obtain them.

I recognise that small- and medium-sized enterprises probably lost patience a long time ago with the lack of concrete measures aimed specifically at them.

Nevertheless, although we are aware of the situation, we would ask them to be patient for another three weeks, until they actually see the draft Charter which will be presented at the European Council.

In fact, the draft version of this Charter will be considered by the Industry Council tomorrow and the Charter will be published in three weeks.

Furthermore, I think that, like the Lisbon Special Summit conclusions, which Mr Gallagher will surely acknowledge go somewhat beyond traditional, merely speculative rhetoric, the Charter must provide concrete and timetabled measures, with firm objectives.

With regard to the Charter' s real potential, let us wait for it to be published and then we will, of course, be willing to listen to criticism from small- and medium-sized enterprises and in particular from the European organisations that coordinate and represent them.

We will be willing to consider all the opinions of small- and medium-sized enterprises.

As they deal with the same subject, Question Nos 15 and 16 will be taken together.

Subject: Specific directive to combat discrimination against the disabled Pursuant to Article 13 of the Treaty of Amsterdam, which provides for action to combat discrimination, the Commission has recently presented a package of measures which include three directives.

However, although disability is included as one of the forms of discrimination which Article 13 is intended to combat, the package of measures does not include a specific directive designed to counter discrimination based on disability.

What view does the Council take regarding the possibility of drawing up a specific directive to combat discrimination on the grounds of disability?

Should it take a favourable view, when would it expect to present an appropriate initiative?

Subject: Combating discrimination At the start of the twenty-first century, which signals a new departure by European society in the direction of greater democracy, cohesion and recognition of the contributions of all citizens, the unacceptable phenomena of racism and social exclusion can be observed.

In Greece, the exclusion of physically disabled and paraplegic citizens from two competitions is causing a social and political problem. One competition is for the employment of officials in state banks and the other is for the employment of school teachers (primary and secondary) in state education, and the exclusion is because the new Code for Public Employees includes the term 'able-bodied' .

The Greek Parliament adopted the Code for Public Employees in 1999, almost at the same time as the ratification of the Treaty of Amsterdam, which protects citizens of the Member States from all types of discrimination against them (Article 13).

In these circumstances, how is the Council intervening to restore the credibility of the European Union' s policies and the dignity of its citizens?

Mr President, under Article 13 of the Treaty establishing the European Community, the Commission has duly presented three proposals which are currently being discussed in the Working Group on Social Issues. These are a proposal for a directive establishing a general framework for equal treatment at work and in professional activities, a proposal for a directive implementing the principle of equal treatment between persons, irrespective of racial or ethnic origin, and also a proposal for a Council decision establishing a programme of Community action for fighting discrimination between 2000 and 2006.

The Commission' s three proposals enshrine different approaches to combating discrimination.

The first proposal prohibits discrimination in the field of employment based on racial or ethnic origin, religion or beliefs, disability, age or sexual orientation.

The second proposal for a directive prohibits discrimination on the grounds of racial or ethnic origin in the areas of employment, education, access to goods and services and in the area of social protection.

The proposal for a decision establishing a programme of action for fighting discrimination, which is designed to support and complement the implementation of the directives through exchanges of information and experience, will be implemented by promoting good practice in legislative and other fields.

Furthermore, the fight against discrimination on the grounds of disability is covered by the first proposal for a directive, which seeks to implement the principle of equal treatment in the field of employment and in carrying out professional activities.

This proposal covers an area which is crucial to our citizens' ability to exercise their rights, given that this is an area in which discrimination is more obvious and has a more negative effect on integrating people into society.

As Parliament is aware, it is the Commission that has the power of legislative initiative, not the Council, and therefore the proposals that the Council adopts will be based on what the Commission proposes to us.

Firstly, I would like to express my satisfaction, both at the existence of Article 13 which has been mentioned, and for the action plan which the President-in-Office of the Council has referred to and which has been developed for the issue that we are considering today.

However, since not everything in the garden can be rosy, I am not completely satisfied at the moment.

It is true that Article 13 covers practically all possible - at the moment at least - forms of discrimination.

However, subsequent regulatory development and the initiatives being proposed are incomplete and unbalanced.

The President-in-Office of the Council has mentioned three examples and I would like to refer to them specifically.

There are certain cases in Article 13 which are susceptible to discrimination, such as the one we are dealing with today, the case of disabled people, which I believe have been implemented in an irregular way.

It is true that there are others which are still much less developed, such as discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation.

However, returning to disability, I believe that the European Union requires more complete legislation which covers every possible type, including cases of double disability.

I would like to know the Council' s opinion - as well as that of the Commission - and I would like to know whether it is considering any initiative for cases such as, for example, women and disability, discrimination on the basis of gender and for the kind of disability involved in the case I have referred to.

Mr President, Mrs Cerdeira Morterero, as I said, these proposals for legislation have been presented by means of Commission initiatives. The Commission, by using the information provided by its various committees, can, of course, take into account the opinions expressed by various interest groups, and in particular those which legitimately oppose discrimination.

Regardless of your real reason for asking a question of this nature, we must recognise that, in recent years, and particularly since the Treaty of Amsterdam, very specific measures have been adopted in the European Union to ensure that these issues are addressed in a far more appropriate way, taking into consideration the interests of the various parts of society that are affected.

In the last few years and over the last decade, the European Union has dedicated a whole approach to this issue and a raft of policies which, although far from ideal, represent a huge qualitative leap forwards.

At world level, we can be truly proud of the steps that we have taken in this area.

But I do acknowledge, of course, that we still have a great deal to do and that probably this accumulation of legislative proposals on discrimination may even lead to and require a different legal procedure.

It is important that we continue to make the Commission aware of this issue and the Council will follow this matter closely and actively.

- (EL) Mr President and Mr President-in-Office, thank you for the replies which you have given us.

I should like to remind the House that the European Council in Lisbon highlighted the promotion of social inclusion and called on the Commission, and the Council, to take priority actions for specific target groups.

One of these groups is the disabled.

Member States choose amongst these actions according to their particular situations and subsequently report on their implementation.

What is happening in Greece, as described in my question, is causing me a great deal of concern because the procedure described by the Lisbon Council gives national legislation and practices the opportunity to practice indirect discrimination.

Perhaps a European observatory should be created so that the specific practices of the Member States and the application of European policy can be better monitored?

Also, does the Council intend to work with candidate countries on the recognition of the rights of minority groups, given that we know they are not properly respected in many of these countries?

Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou, I cannot add much more to what I have already said.

You are concerned at the shortcomings in the way these principles are being implemented and I would say that such shortcomings will have to be rectified.

I feel that it is extremely important today for all forms of discrimination to be addressed and monitored at political level, either by establishing a specific monitoring centre or by using existing mechanisms, which are more appropriate for monitoring and managing the experience of individual countries.

In any event, I must say that the Council follows this type of issue with great interest and I believe that the attention paid by Parliament to such issues is crucial to keeping them on the Community agenda, and in ensuring that the various Member States do not feel tempted to make any exceptions - within their own borders - to what the Union decides as a whole.

As the author is not present, Question No 17 lapses.

Subject: Burma What further measures will the Council consider taking if existing measures appear to be inadequate and if the second EU Troika mission meets with no greater success than the first, when the common position on Burma comes up for another renewal in October?

Mr President, the European Union has been closely following the situation in Myanmar for several years.

More recently, at its meeting in April, the Council adopted three additional sanctions against the Burmese regime.

At that Council meeting - and against the background of the concern that has been felt for many years - the Union' s concern at the situation in Burma-Myanmar was expressed, specifically with regard to the repeated and active repression of civil and political rights, and the harsh conditions that prevent the people from exercising their economic, social and cultural rights.

Once again, the Council urged the government of Burma-Myanmar to respect human rights, to restore democracy and to establish dialogue with the opposition, which would lead to national reconciliation in a unified and democratic State.

For this reason, the Council decided to renew the common position adopted in relation to Burma-Myanmar for a further six months and, at the same time, to ban exports of equipment that may be used for internal repression or intimidation, and to improve the current visa system, by identifying those people who are covered by this system and those who support it. Furthermore, the Council wishes, with the agreement of all Member States, to refuse to grant an entry visa for the Minister for Foreign Affairs, a decision which could be reversed if it is in the interest of the European Union, to freeze assets held abroad by the persons I have just mentioned, who are associated with these acts of repression, and to make greater efforts to explain and promote the objectives of European Union policy on Burma-Myanmar by establishing meaningful political dialogue.

To this end, the European Union plans to send a second EU Troika mission to Rangoon.

The Council has furthermore decided to ask the Commission to study the possibilities of increasing humanitarian aid for Burma-Myanmar, with the aim of directly helping the people, and in particular of distinguishing development aid from direct aid to the people, in particular through non-governmental organisations.

I think that the European Union' s concern about the situation in Burma-Myanmar has been made sufficiently clear and I believe that it matches the concerns that have been expressed by Parliament.

President-in-Office, thank you for the answer.

I am, of course, very happy that the new common position has been established by the Council and that it has strengthened the position as compared with the past.

I prefer to use the name Burma rather than Myanmar since the people of Burma and now Aung San Suu Kyi, the legitimate leader in Burma, do not refer to it as Myanmar.

I should prefer it if Parliament avoided the term Myanmar also.

I have to say to the President-in-Office that the net impact of the various measures the European Union has imposed since 1996 has been very limited: the Burmese have not entered into dialogue with Aung San Suu Kyi and the democratic forces in Burma remain as outside the whole process as ever.

Whilst I express my support, one thing still puzzles me.

Whilst we take these measures, there is no progress on the pressure that some of us in Parliament have been trying to exert on the Council in relation to the need for sanctions - sanctions, of course, which Aung San Suu Kyi has consistently called for.

Related to that, we continue to oppose the Massachusetts Federal laws which impose very effective sanctions on Burma.

We are waiting for the US to decide against these Federal laws.

If the US decides in favour of Massachusetts, will the European Union then reintroduce our opposition in the World Trade Organisation to these measures taken in Massachusetts?

Mrs Kinnock, I am pleased that we agree on the importance of renewing the common position.

I admit that the action the European Union has taken in this area may not have changed the situation in any concrete way.

I would remind you that in this area, my country spent years, sometimes in relative isolation from the rest of the Community, trying to draw attention to the situation in Indonesia, and the success of that pressure was only measurable against the internal reaction and above all against action by the people of East Timor.

It is obvious, however, that EU action in such a far-off place cannot always have an immediate impact on changing the political conditions that mark the current regime, specifically human rights violations and the lack of respect for these countries' most basic democratic rights.

I would nevertheless like to refer to something that I did not mention just now. The resolution on the human rights situation in Burma adopted by the United Nations Human Rights Commission in April of this year is also important.

I would also like to say - and this is an important point that also concerns the overall framework of relations between the European Union and countries in South-East Asia, and acts as an element of cumulative pressure - that relations between the European Union and ASEAN have, since 1998, been through a rather strained period, precisely because of the problems resulting from Burma' s membership of that organisation.

Because of the common position on Burma, it was impossible to invite the Burmese delegation to the EU-ASEAN ministerial meeting in Berlin, which led to that meeting being cancelled.

I cannot predict what the European Union' s attitude to this situation may be in the future.

As the author is not present, Question No 19 lapses.

Subject: Decision-making powers of the Euro 11 The media quite frequently make reference to the 'Euro 11' as if it were a formal decision-making body within the EU's institutional structure.

Infeuro No 13, however, defines the Euro 11 as follows: 'This is not a Council in any legal sense but an informal gathering of the Economic Affairs and Finance Ministers of the 11 Member States participating in the euro area ... However, Ecofin remains the decision-making body.

In the light of this statement, will the Council say what exactly takes place at Euro 11 meetings and what implications it may have for the EU's regulated decision-making procedure?

Can the Council confirm that no decisions whatever are taken at Euro 11 meetings?

Can the Council refute media reports that references have been made at Ecofin meetings to decisions already having been taken by the Euro 11?

Once again, I am sorry that the honourable Member who asked a question, this time question number 19, is not present, as this would have given me the opportunity to provide an answer with regard to my own country. In any event, I am more than happy to answer question number 20.

As stated in the European Council Resolution of 13 December 1997, the meetings of the 'Euro 11' group are informal and their aim is to enable Member States to coordinate, through discussion, issues which relate to the responsibilities that they share with regard to the single currency.

Formal decisions cannot be taken at these meetings and are, in all cases, as is in fact stated in the Resolution, taken by the Ecofin Council in accordance with the procedures laid down in the Treaty. I think that this is quite clear and that this dual framework works in accordance with its own rationale.

By that I mean that Euro 11 is an informal setting, and Ecofin is the formal setting. The function of the first category of meetings is purely to coordinate the countries that have joined Economic and Monetary Union and which are part of the single currency.

Thank you for your answer, which I think was important and valuable.

In the debate in those countries which are not participating in the third phase of EMU and which are not therefore becoming a part of the euro zone, the point has been made that ministers from these countries are losing influence, not only on issues directly affecting the euro, but also on other issues dealt with by Ecofin.

A real shift in power seems, in fact, to be taking place, from the meetings of Ecofin to those of the Euro 11, despite the fact that the latter are of an informal nature.

I should therefore like the Council' s representative to confirm that there is no real shift in power whatsoever from the formal, regular Ecofin meetings to those of the Euro 11.

I should like the Council' s representative genuinely to confirm that it is not the case that ministers from, for example, Denmark or Great Britain, are losing the power to influence other issues dealt with by Ecofin because these countries are not members of the Euro 11.

Mr Gahrton, the cause of your concern will vanish on the day that these countries attend this Council, which will then no longer be Euro 11, but Euro 15.

In any event, I must tell you that until then, nothing within the European Union prevents countries meeting in smaller groups than in the normal Community context.

We are all aware, from newspapers or from conversations in corridors, that various countries in Europe, particularly the Nordic countries, regularly coordinate their positions in a framework that predates the Community decision-making process.

This coordination does not, of course, mean that there is any transfer of power to the specific framework in which these discussions are held.

This is purely and simply a coordination of joint positions, and it is perfectly natural that countries that joined the third phase of Economic and Monetary Union and which are members of the single currency should need to find specific measures to express their action and that they should collectively bring these issues to Ecofin.

I do not think, however, that the position of the other countries is any more restricted in Ecofin than it was at the beginning.

But, let us be frank here: minorities are minorities.

This means that the democratic process is at work in Ecofin and there is nothing we can do about that.

That is how the EU works.

Mr President, I too should like to thank the Portuguese President for his answer, and I would also ask him to confirm that there is no question of an issue being taken off the agenda for any meeting of Ecofin because it has already been discussed in a Euro 11 meeting.

If that were to happen, would it not be possible for any minister at all to be able to insist that it be put back on the agenda for the Ecofin meeting?

Mrs Sandbæk, let us be quite clear about this.

The Euro 11 arrangement forms part of the framework for coordinating relations between certain countries that have a different level of integration or, to use more modern parlance, closer cooperation as predetermined in the Treaty, and this involves certain coordination mechanisms.

The Euro 11 Council can obviously discuss whatever it likes, and may even agree that a certain issue is not discussed in Ecofin. This does not mean that the countries that are not members of Euro 11, but which are, of course, members of Ecofin, cannot raise that issue under the Ecofin Council agenda.

What must not happen is that a country that is not part of Euro 11 is asked to set the agenda for those that are.

I must say one more very simple thing, Mrs Sandbæk. The other countries are not in Euro 11 or Euro 15 only because they do not want to be, not because anyone has banned them from joining.

Thank you very much, Mr Seixas da Costa.

We hope that you have success with your contact with the Parliamentary group on the important issue of the Statute of Members.

Since the time allocated to Questions to the Council has elapsed, Questions Nos 21 to 31 will be replied to in writing.

That concludes Questions to the Council.

(The sitting was suspended at 7.05 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m.)

The next item is the joint debate on the following reports:

A5-0094/2000 by Mr Paasilinna, on behalf of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, on the communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions: Fifth Report on the implementation of the Telecommunications Regulatory package (COM(1999) 537 - C5-0112/2000 - 2000/2072(COS));

A5-0122/2000 by Mr Alyssandrakis, on behalf of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, on the communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions: Next Steps in Radio Spectrum Policy - Results of the Public Consultation on the Green Paper (COM(1999) 538 - C5-0113/2000 - 2000/2073(COS)).

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, deregulation in the telecommunications sector has continued for a decade and it has been a great success.

The traditional telephone as we knew it is now a fading memory.

In the past, people acquired a telephone in order to keep in touch with each other, but now they have become shareholders in a company, which could, for example, be acting as an intermediary in sexual services.

I am sure this has come as a surprise to many.

The instrument itself is so tiny that it could, for instance, be inadvertently placed in the mouth, being mistaken for false teeth; in this respect, too, things have changed a lot.

Deregulation created fears of a fall in standards of public services and an increase in telephone charges.

This has not happened, however, and instead services have become diversified and prices have fallen.

Money to finance all this has, of course, been generated by new data terminal equipment, networks and services.

The 1988 regulatory package was well timed and - due to its efficient implementation - worked well in several Member States.

In some countries, however, implementation has been slow and even formal.

We would support action by the Commission to improve cross-border services and honest competition.

We are concerned at the fact that the limited supply of user access has prevented many user groups - in particular those with lower resources - from taking full advantage of, for instance, reasonably affordable Internet access.

Therefore, we need new alternative loop systems, we must facilitate the development of wireless local loop systems and also, for instance, the use of a cable TV network, without having to resort to specific legislation on this issue, however.

Parliament notes that due to the variations in its implementations, the current regime has led to legal uncertainty in different Member States.

Sufficient transparency on the specific conditions for operating licences is required, so that undue delays in the approval process can be prevented.

The most important reform strategy of the European Union is a reform initiative called eEurope, the framework of which was recently approved in Lisbon.

The Commission must be congratulated on the fact that the structure and strategy of the European information society differ in a positive way from others in that it has not only taken account of competitiveness, but also of elements such as cohesion, social equality and employment.

The objective is to prevent social discrimination and to increase consumer confidence and social cohesion.

This initiative is impressively entitled: "An Information Society For All" .

The radio spectrum is a scarce natural resource which has now started to come up for auction.

We take a negative view of this with the exception of certain special instances.

We were aware, as early as two years ago, that the GSM auction in the USA had resulted in a state of chaos, i.e. bankruptcies. Experiences from India are equally bad.

Those in favour of auctioning believe it to be a good means of controlling resources.

We think it will lead to increases in user tariffs and delays in the spreading and development of communications services.

Prices at auction have now become incredibly high, and these will be passed on to the consumers, resulting in a new telecommunications tax.

This would be an unfair tax, in that it would be the same for both rich and poor. Now that the eEurope initiative - with all its worthy objectives - has just been approved, it is being obstructed by the imposition of a new 'digital divide' , a greedy fee-charging principle.

In practice, this means that our priority project, the development of an information society, is now being obstructed through taxation. This is cause for concern, which, in my opinion, should be looked into in greater detail.

I therefore request that the Commission investigate, without delay, the impact of this, the auctioning principle, in different countries, in order that we should have more information on which to base our opinion. Furthermore, this principle will privilege big operators, who will start dividing up the market.

In the end, there will be the fear that as we reduce regulations, i.e. deregulate, these big operators will make mutual agreements and 'reregulate' , creating new regulations. This cannot be right.

(EL) Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, the idea of using the radio spectrum to transmit signals revolutionised telecommunications and new applications for the radio spectrum have been developed continuously ever since.

Thus, we have progressed from the simple wireless telegraph to the digital transmission of sound and image, satellite navigation and the third generation of mobile telephones.

I should like at this point to stress that the radio spectrum is not used solely for telecommunications.

Apart from applications based on the transmission and reception of radio signals, there are also 'passive' applications which just receive signals emitted by natural phenomena.

The main applications here are radio-astronomy, which studies natural phenomena beyond our planet on the basis of the radio waves which they emit, and Earth observation, both of which use the radio spectrum.

The constant increase in the demand for radio frequencies for new applications is such that we need to review the principles on which they are distributed and the policy which the European Union needs to apply in this sector.

The European Commission responded to this need by publishing a Green Paper on Radio Spectrum Policy for public consultation at the end of 1998.

It subsequently issued the communication which we are examining today on the basis of the aforementioned public consultation.

The Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, having expressed its satisfaction with the work of the European Commission, has come to a number of conclusions and has formulated a number of principles.

Starting from the premise that the spectrum is a valuable but scarce natural resource and that the demand for it is rising constantly, it stresses that it must be used efficiently in order to best serve the public interest and help develop new high-quality services.

In this respect, the Committee on Industry considers that spectrum policy cannot be solely market-driven, that the economic and social value of the radio spectrum should not be assessed on the basis of profit opportunity and that we need a balanced combination of commercial and social interests.

The Committee on Industry also stresses that specific measures need to be taken in order to guarantee a satisfactory number of frequencies for public and private radio and television broadcasts, for amateur radio operators, for navigation systems and for passive applications, such as radio-astronomy and Earth observation.

The Committee on Industry accepts the proposal of the European Commission to create a Spectrum Policy Expert Group having a purely advisory role and transparent internal structure and modus operandi.

However, although it acknowledges that it would be advisable to further harmonise Community radio spectrum policy to an extent, as far as pan-European services and applications are concerned, it does not accept the European Commission' s proposal for a new regulatory framework at pan-European level, considering this to be both premature and hurried.

I should like to draw your attention to one issue which seriously worried the Committee on Industry and which Mr Paasilinna mentioned just now. I refer to the degree to which the principle of spectrum pricing, auctioning and the introduction of a secondary market should be adopted.

Your rapporteur takes the view that radio frequencies per se should not be bought and sold, because this would result in frequencies' being diverted from their intended purpose.

Other practices, such as auctions and a secondary market, would result, with mathematical accuracy, in the prevalence of stronger economic interests, which would then monopolise the market.

Your rapporteur is in favour of an overall payment for each commercial service which uses the spectrum.

The Committee on Industry did not adopt my view and, although not in favour of auctions in all cases, considers that they could be applied for commercial uses.

I should like to point out to members that the results of the recent auction of radio frequencies for third generation mobile telephones in the United Kingdom have given rise to second thoughts on the subject.

The huge sums paid will not come out of the companies' profits; they will be paid for by users.

I have heard that in the United Kingdom, in order to find the money paid at auction, every man, woman and child will need to spend 400 pounds a year on telephone calls.

We must not lose sight of the consequences which such practices will have on the final user.

I therefore call upon the House to vote in favour of Amendments Nos 4, 12, 5 and 6, so that our final resolution includes a clear position against auctions.

Mr President, on behalf of the PPE-DE Group, I wish to congratulate Mr Paasilinna on his report, which we very much welcome.

He has drawn up not only a very concise but also a very hard-hitting report.

It is entirely appropriate as a response to the telecommunications communication from the Commission and exactly what we needed to give us a basis on which to move into our further consideration of the whole electronic communications package, which we shall be debating again in a month's time.

I want to focus on some of the key points highlighted in the report.

I am going to leave issues on radio spectrum policy to my colleague, Mrs Niebler, who will be responding on behalf of our Group to Mr Alyssandrakis' report.

Just to move forward on some of the issues related to opening up the market.

The first and most encouraging thing from our point of view is that we now see the wisdom of opening the telecommunications market.

To have an open competitive regime has now become the accepted wisdom.

It is something that is fully accepted and we now need to translate that and move that forward as quickly as possible, towards further deregulation and even quicker opening of those markets that still work imperfectly.

There is a tremendous amount of detailed analysis in this report and it clearly shows the consumer benefits in price reductions, choice and increased services that have flowed from deregulation.

However, it also clearly shows that there are far too many barriers, and the Commission has our full support in tackling them.

For consumers to benefit from this choice, they have to be encouraged to shop around, to compare in many cases what can be quite complex offers of prices and contract terms and service packages.

We would like to encourage independent regulators to work together to provide simple, impartial price comparisons for consumers and use the sort of new tools they have available, like the Internet, to give consumers the ability to calculate the real cost of their calls.

We encourage the regulators to share best practice with each other to provide a unified price and contract comparison system.

We will not have a developed market unless we have investment.

The other issue we have to address is the ability of investors to make satisfactory returns on their investment.

Therefore, in looking at the market-opening regulations, we have to look at methods of competition and encourage competition between the different parts and elements of the platforms.

That is something we shall address in the next communication.

We welcome this report, which is really going to encourage market-opening to the benefit of consumers and the European economy.

Mr President, Commissioner, previous speakers have mentioned the broad consensus that exists concerning the profits arising from the liberalisation of the telecommunications sector.

There was no such consensus previously.

To my great delight, I note that it is liberals who have been in the vanguard of this change: Commissioner Bangemann, together with Finland' s former Minister for Transport, Mr Norrback, who was among the first ministers to liberalise this sector.

I would point out, for example, that, last year, we in Finland noted that GSM prices were, on average, seven per cent lower.

Even foreign calls were ten per cent lower than previously.

We are therefore still making quite large strides in this area.

I also hope that, in the future, we shall be able to conduct a similar open dialogue with the Commission regarding development within this sector.

The Commission is undertaking many investigations and inquiries.

We need impartial information to be able to keep track of developments and, as public decision makers, to be able to take the necessary decisions.

These two reports deal with issues both large and small.

In common with previous speakers, I would express my appreciation of the constructive cooperation that has taken place with the rapporteurs.

The major issues are about the ways in which broadband services can be made available to everyone and about the auctions we have touched upon.

Clearly, it is up to each Member State to decide upon its strategy for obtaining networks with high transmission speeds for everyone.

However, we wish today to offer vigorous support to the Commission' s recommendation that dominant network operators should be responsible for permitting combined services all the way to the subscribers.

In certain Member States, that is already the case, for example in my own country, Finland.

Even there, consideration might be given to going further by introducing a situation in which dominant operators become responsible for hiring out the telecommunications companies' premises for the purpose of housing equipment.

I think we need to see to it that we utilise existing capacity as far as possible and obtain better service and, in that way, lower prices.

The auctions issue has provoked discussion and does so every day.

One might well wonder if it is a question here of being penny wise and pound foolish.

Apart from the risk of the auction prices for third generation mobile telephones putting the brakes on development, there are two other matters I should like to emphasise.

There is a risk of roaming for third generation mobile telephony being put in jeopardy. There may also be a risk of barriers arising between the Member States.

I would therefore hope that the Commission is alert to this question and that we can engage in a creative discussion on the subject.

Mr President, Commissioner, twenty years have passed since the philosopher and essayist, Alvin Toffler, identified the new information technologies as the third of humanity' s great revolutions.

Nevertheless, in Europe, we once again failed to take much notice of our thinkers and, in the meantime, over the last decade, the United States has increased its GDP and income per capita to above European Union levels, where, in the last year, these indicators represented barely 75% of US levels.

While half of the world' s internet users are American and 44% of US homes have direct access to the networks, in Europe that proportion is barely 15%.

We are now rapidly turning to the information society, information technology, the Internet, the Galileo network for monitoring and intercommunication by satellite, the liberalisation and convergence of telecommunications and technological advances in general.

For all these reasons I would like to call for the prompt transposition in all Member States of all the directives relating to radio-broadcasting and voice telephony, the interconnection and maintenance of digitisation, general authorisations and licences, leased lines, open networks, mobile telephones and data protection.

In this regard, we should condemn the fact that the national regulatory authorities of certain countries - such as Spain, Germany, Sweden and the United Kingdom - are not playing their part to the full, which has led to complaints from new companies, who have found that the telecommunications monopolies that already exist are placing obstacles in their way and delaying the consolidation of free competition to the detriment of users.

Furthermore, we ask that, as soon as possible, flat rates be established for access to the Internet, to the network of networks, and we even argue that they should be free, since they should be offered, like health and education, as an essential public service to the citizens.

Mr President, there has been a change over to electronic capitalism, both in Europe and worldwide.

On the stock markets, there is a 'gold rush' for the shares of IT companies - IT shares are a present-day Klondyke.

The reports by Mr Paasilinna and Mr Alyssandrakis emphasise the necessity of rules even for gold prospecting: if the common and public interest is not secured, the richest, largest and fastest players will take all, and they will reap all the fruits of the new technological developments.

A rapid concentration of the information industry is in progress - at the consumers' expense.

The battle over market shares for next generation mobile phone frequencies, for example, will raise consumer prices sky high.

As we know, the profit from these shares will ultimately always be generated through the prices of telephone calls.

We must now ensure that public interest is secured - as proposed by Mr Alyssandrakis - and ensure the availability of sufficient frequency bands for use by public broadcasting.

This will not be possible if such a restricted natural resource as the radio spectrum is auctioned off for the monopolised use of the highest bidding major companies.

Rapporteur, ladies and gentlemen, in 1993 the European Union undertook to open up the telecommunications market.

Since then, this decision has led to the adoption of a series of directives, and we have constantly been reminded that there is a political objective underlying these regulations, namely growth, employment, competitiveness and the provision of access to the information society for all citizens, with the necessary legal protection.

In this context, the Commission has performed its monitoring role and produced a raft of reports, and the communication we are discussing today is part of this undertaking.

I must say that the assessment presented to us is, at least, detailed.

Although, during the two years since the market was completely opened up, the telecommunications market has been characterised by growth, newcomers to the market and some price reductions, nonetheless, gaps have also appeared which are serious to say the very least, including what is known as the digital divide between regions and between citizens caused by the cost of accessing these new services and, along with this divide, the exclusion of some citizens or regions from the new technology society.

It is therefore imperative that we do not lose sight of the objective of providing a high-quality service for all citizens if we want to avoid creating a fresh division within our society.

Moreover, today we are debating reducing the cost of Internet access within the framework of local loop competition.

The objective is admirable, but we must avoid certain errors and must, therefore, discuss the matter very thoroughly with the national authorities.

Once again, I would stress the need to simplify the rules, as well as consumer protection, the role of the national regulatory authorities and the licensing system which has been discussed at great length.

Finally, opening up the market is not an end in itself: it is a means of ensuring that the transition to an information society is made by and for all citizens through the creation of permanent jobs, and this is certainly not always the case in this field.

Mr President, I would like to thank Mr Reino Paasilinna for his thorough and excellent work in preparing this report, but I would also like to thank the Commission, which has done so much in support of this eEurope initiative and the expansion of the Internet.

As the Commission has stated, there has been a lot of progress in the past few years in the EU telecommunications sector, but there is still a lot to be learnt where the mobile phone market is concerned.

For instance, the availability of carrier pre-selection should be considered, and this facility made available to consumers, if studies confirm that they are going to benefit from this pre-selection.

In future, it is incumbent on the Commission to ensure more vigorously than ever that the 'roaming' fees charged to users by operators are brought down in all EU countries to a sensible level based on actual costs.

At the same time, the Commission must ensure that the fees collected from the operators remain under control.

The EU' s operating logic thus falls into two stages.

The operators are not allowed to collect fees from the users, but neither must the public authority collect from the operators.

The costs to the operator might become unreasonably high, should the new generation mobile spectrum be auctioned.

Auctioning may also distort competition, if operators start making 'tactical' bids for the spectrum in order to harm the position of their competitors at auction.

Therefore 'beauty contests' between the various operators are clearly more consumer-friendly alternatives.

The latest UMTS auction in Great Britain, where prices soared sky high, will, in any case, set the alarm bells ringing.

After the hammer has gone down, it is always the consumer who foots the bill - and that is exactly what we do not want, all of us being consumers ourselves.

If we also want to introduce the Internet into schools and libraries and make it available for everybody on a very large scale in future, and if we also want to utilise its future potential in competition with the USA, the Internet will have to be affordable to all.

Mr President, I wish to congratulate Mr Paasilinna and Mr Alyssandrakis on their very timely and invaluable work.

As part of an on-going exercise of monitoring by the Commission, the Fifth Report sets the scene for many of the conclusions and recommendations made in the communication' s review, which was issued at the same time, and on which we, and the European Parliament, are working right now.

Mr Paasilinna' s report inevitably touches on some of the issues to be addressed by the final proposals, which we will discuss here again next month.

The Commission shares many of the concerns expressed in Mr Paasilinna' s report on the current regulatory situation.

They are vitally important for the uptake of the information society, for the development of the Internet, e-commerce and m-commerce - mobile commerce.

They offer unbundled access to the local loop, facilitating developments in licensing, co-location, carrier pre-selection and the independence and the powers of national regulatory authorities.

The Commission is addressing many of these problems which you identify at the moment.

It has the very recent recommendation on the local loop and on bundling.

The Commission will also use its powers in regard to competition to monitor carefully dominant positions.

We have also made a revised recommendation on interconnection pricing and now we have on-going enforcement measures and infringement proceedings, for example, against a number of Member States on carrier pre-selection and local tariff structures.

Pending the adoption of the new framework, which will be presented in June, the Commission will continue to press for effective implementation of the current rules.

This is called for by market players, national regulators and national administrations and has now also been unanimously mandated by the Lisbon Summit.

At the moment, the Commission is preparing the sixth framework report to be adopted during 2000.

Parliament' s report will provide important input.

I am sure that the report will be an important benchmark as we follow the development of the information society.

Cable systems will be examined more closely by the Commission.

We already have a policy of pushing for divestment of cable TV networks to ensure greater local competition and to stimulate investments and services, as Parliament is calling for in these reports.

As to the radio spectrum issue and the report of Mr Alyssandrakis, I agree that radio spectrum is an increasingly scarce and valuable resource.

It is used in many policy areas of concern for the EU, such as telecoms, broadcasting, transport, research and development, which are all very important for the European economy.

For that reason, the Commission proposes a harmonised approach.

Mobile and wireless communications develop at a rapid pace and the unexpectedly high results of spectrum licence auctioning in the UK show the growing importance of the sector.

Furthermore, the messages of the spectrum Green Paper demonstrate the need to address certain radio spectrum issues at Community level and to reach a balance between various user sectors.

Second, Community action on the radio spectrum is beneficial if taken within a clear regulatory framework.

In addition, political support is required to facilitate the achievement of Community objectives at international level.

We have the on-going radio conference in Istanbul where issues like Galileo or third generation spectrum will be discussed.

The Commission therefore welcomes the report from Mr Alyssandrakis.

As this report calls for a radio spectrum policy, which fulfils Community policies, further harmonisation of radio spectrum is necessary.

We have to see development of information and communications technologies and a balance between all spectrum needs including private and public interest.

The competitiveness of European industry at global level must be developed in the interest of the European citizen.

At the same time, the Commission would like to stress that it is urgent and not premature to have an appropriate framework at the Community level to implement the spectrum policy options agreed in the Spectrum policy group and to ensure that results of harmonisation mandates are implemented in the Union.

We should be able to promote without delay harmonisation measures which respond to technological and market developments.

The Commission will report annually to the Council and the European Parliament on the measures adopted.

As far as further actions are concerned, the Commission will present by the end of June - after Parliament' s discussions and the votes on the radio reports - the appropriate framework for radio spectrum policy in the EC.

This will also take into account the results of the overall discussion which is now taking place in the 1999 review.

We well understand the debate on auction prices which have received a lot of attention here.

According to the present new rules, the Commission must recognise the authority of Member States to choose their preferred spectrum licensing method, whether it is the administrative or auction method, but the Commission will closely monitor developments to avoid distortion of competition and ensure the implementation of the licensing directive and also technological and service developments in the interest of EU citizens.

Mrs Read put a question about the balance between competition and regulation.

I would say that we need regulation to push for competition because otherwise bottlenecks can actually prevent competition which can help citizens because it will be the incentive for lower prices and higher quality services.

But there are areas where we also have a major public policy interest, especially in regard to universal service and data privacy.

In those areas the Commission will make proposals in the context of the new legislation on electronic communications which will be presented at the end of June.

At the same time, the Commission also intends defining this balance between the markets and public policy in the context of the Europe Action Plan, which should be presented next week.

Finally, as far as the coherence of the licensing arrangements is concerned, we must ensure there will be no distortion of competition and guarantee the implementation of the licensing directive.

This whole discussion is very important for defining the content of the new electronic communications legislation, and I am sure these issues will not be the concern of only a few passionate expert parliamentarians as is the case today - electronic communications will be a major political issue in the years to come.

Thank you very much, Commissioner Liikanen.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon.

The next item is the report (A5-0119/2000) by Mr Alyssandrakis, on behalf of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, on the Commission working document: Towards a coherent European Approach for space (SEC(1999) 789 - C5-0336/1999 - 1999/2213(COS)).

. (EL) Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, the launch of the first artificial satellite by the Soviet Union in 1957 marked the start of space exploration and the beginning of a new era for mankind.

Man' s ability to launch space vehicles has extended our frontiers well beyond the Earth' s atmosphere and has afforded us a wealth of new knowledge on the solar system and the universe as a whole.

At the same time, it has brought practical applications which have changed our lives.

The use of artificial satellites in telecommunications, weather forecasting, Earth observation and navigation is so widespread that it is hard to imagine these activities continuing without the use of space.

Moreover, the high technical standards required of space equipment have led to enormous technological breakthroughs, which have gradually filtered into our everyday lives.

Finally, space has always had a strategic importance, since whoever controls space also controls the Earth.

Space is the one sector in which international cooperation is particularly important.

In Europe, the European Space Agency (ESA), an independent body comprising 14 European countries, 12 of which are members of the European Union, has played a critical role in fostering cooperation in space exploration, space applications and the development of research in space.

The Council, the Commission and Parliament have all addressed the issue of space policy on a number of occasions in the past.

The main political issue in the entire discussion concerned the development of a coherent approach to space and the promotion of collaboration between the European Union and the ESA on the basis of specific targets and within a clear framework.

The Commission' s working document being examined today comes as a response to the Council' s resolution of 22 June 1998 calling on the Commission to take practical measures to promote cooperation between the European Union and the ESA.

The text discusses aspects of the European Union' s space policy concerning practical applications, mainly in the fields of telecommunications, navigation and Earth observation, but makes no mention of space exploration or the use of space for scientific research.

From this point of view, the document is somewhat limited in scope, since an overall policy for space cannot restrict itself merely to practical applications.

The Commission has made it clear that a coherent approach is indispensable for the European Union.

It has therefore set up a consultative structure for space and related matters with the active participation of the ESA.

This structure comprises the Space Advisory Group and other high-level groups.

The Commission' s document concludes that the European Union must find new means of implementing a space policy and proposes specific lines of approach.

The resolution by the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy expresses a strong desire to see space used for peaceful purposes for the benefit of mankind as a whole.

At the same time, it takes the view that space policy must not be wholly dominated by the market and that account must be taken of long-term assessments of the benefits and risks of exploiting space, not only from the point of view of the interests of industry, but also in terms of the welfare of mankind as a whole.

It stresses the importance of international cooperation, the need for all Member States to participate in space activities and the importance of collaboration with third countries, and points out that the ESA has functioned efficiently and has played a leading role in space research and space applications in both Europe and worldwide.

The Committee on Industry welcomes the European Commission' s intention of establishing a policy framework for future programmes and stresses that this framework must be developed after extensive and in-depth consultations between all the parties involved.

It is in favour of the further development of launching systems, the development of new telecommunications systems and further European participation in the Alpha station programme and reiterates the European Parliament' s support for the development of the global satellite navigation system known as Galileo.

It calls on the Commission, in collaboration with the Member States, to take all measures needed for effective use of space-based systems for monitoring the environment and for security, in order to protect citizens' lives and natural resources, identify at an early stage, or even avert natural or man-made disasters and help combat fraud.

I am convinced, fellow members, that today' s debate will help to develop space policy further.

Mr Alyssandrakis, ladies and gentlemen, everyone is in favour of mankind' s direct or indirect access to space for, in the first place, it is a dream, a fantastic adventure and a way of expanding our knowledge.

But, in addition to this, it has, above all, generated incredible change in our everyday lives.

Satellites and telecommunications have been mentioned, and we could add the weather forecast.

However, we must also acknowledge that space is a strategic issue: we have mentioned the terrible war between the United States and the USSR.

Today, although the United States and Russia still dominate this sector, the countries of Europe play a major and increasingly significant role.

It is of paramount importance that we establish a European strategy if we want to lend more weight to the Union and this strategy must maintain a balance between the various uses made of space.

The European Space Agency has played a role which has been crucial for the cooperation between European countries in the field of the exploitation of space and research development.

However, as the rapporteur suggests, it would appear necessary to extend its activities to projects launched within the Community framework.

We must also make up for the absence of a genuine European policy and a European strategy ensuring the effective use of space systems to monitor the environment and to provide security, protect natural resources, detect or forecast natural and man-made disasters and combat fraud.

A large chunk of the practical applications involving space is already controlled by the market, and I feel that this is dangerous.

The Commission must put forward measures to control what are genuine abuses.

Lastly, together with many of my fellow Members, I am extremely pleased that the Galileo project met with such approval. It will ensure that Europe makes a substantial contribution to the establishment of a worldwide satellite navigation system.

To sum up, the new approach to space policy must be based on a close partnership between the Member States, the European Union and the European Space Agency.

This is the only way to achieve the consensus such a policy requires.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, Commissioners, the European market for space applications is fragmented.

There are many smaller companies active which do not work together very well.

In order to be able to compete on the global market, it is necessary to restructure the space industry, that is to say integrate various companies into one company or group of companies.

There is, as such, plenty of work for the space advice group.

Cooperation at Community and international level in space activities is imperative.

My second point concerns the position of the European satellite industry.

Since the end of the cold war, the strategic importance of having our own satellite industry has been of commercial importance.

The sector is growing by 10% annually and thus helping create employment.

If the European Union does not want to miss the boat, the Commission and Member States need to promote the development of the industry.

Satellite systems are the means to further develop information and communications technology.

Unfortunately, the European satellite industry is very much dominated by governments.

This is why it works too much in isolation, without a great deal of interaction with the computer, network, software and peripheral equipment industry. As a result, the industry is increasingly losing its market share to the US.

More cooperation and company mergers are needed, as well as more support in technology development, through the framework programme, among other things.

My Group is waiting with bated breath for the document the Commission has promised on a European space satellite in which, needless to say, the input of the European Space Agency is vital.

All this noise is making things very difficult: the sound quality is dreadful.

I would appreciate it if the technicians could do something about it.

The Bureau has also noted that there is a problem with the sound, but this problem can, of course, only be fixed when we are not working.

Let us hope that the sound quality will be better tomorrow.

Mr President, although I do want to congratulate Mr Konstantinos Alyssandrakis on his extremely comprehensive report, I have to say that, on this occasion, the Commission, in particular, and this final report have not been bold enough as regards the European space research initiative.

As has already been said, there is no longer any competition between America and the Soviet bloc, and yet, for all its scientists and technical expertise, Europe is unable to launch itself into space and space research.

We need to increase funding and create a specific budget heading for space research.

The European Union should manage national space research budgets, for space research is, by nature, one of the main activities of the European Union and would clearly not yield satisfactory results if carried out merely at individual State level.

We need to create a European Union space body which is separate from the ESA: the ESA is something different.

We need to organise the launching of low cost European Union satellites to serve European industries.

Finally, I would like to point out that pensioners should somehow be included in this space research.

Well, in the United States, a famous pensioner, the astronaut John Glenn, went into space at the age of 69.

I am 55 years old and in 15 years' time I will be 69.

I am already a politician: I could become an astronaut, the first pensioner astronaut of the European Union.

I am booking my seat today!

Thank you very much, Commissioner Busquin.

The vote will take place on Thursday at 12 noon.

The next item is the report (A5-0131/2000) by Mrs Plooij-Van Gorsel, on behalf of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, on the Communication from the Commission to the Council, the European Parliament, the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions: Towards a European research area (COM(2000) 6 - C5-0115/2000 - 2000/2075(COS)).

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, Commissioner, I would first of all like to thank Commissioner Busquin for launching a broad debate on a European research area.

It comes at exactly the right time, between two framework programmes.

At present, there is no European research area as such.

The research policy of the Member States and that of the Union are running parallel without forming a coherent unit.

In addition, we invest far less in research than the United States and Japan.

These two factors have caused the chasm between us and the United States to widen even more over the past few years.

If the European Union wants to invest in more competitiveness, and thus more employment, we will need an approach which is broader and more innovative than the one we have pursued so far.

The forthcoming enlargement of the Union makes this all the more pressing.

The European Member States need to leave behind their technological nationalism and strive more towards a European Union for research and technology too.

This means that European researchers need access to each other' s national programmes.

The European framework programme for research and technological development is a useful instrument for stimulating international cooperation, but this programme on its own is not enough to boost the joint European research efforts.

Although it only makes up 6% of total European research expenditure, the framework programme fulfils an important multiplier function, a kind of flywheel function.

Industry pays 60% of total investments in research in Europe, 90% of which is spent on research to improve existing production processes and, in this way, to retain the competitive edge.

Only 10% is spent on new innovative research.

As such, the framework programme certainly makes a considerable contribution to this 10%.

Europe has no problem converting euros into research, but has far greater difficulty converting research into euros.

It appears that commercialisation, i.e. injecting expertise into a product, seems to be much more successful in the United States than it is in Europe.

A better link is required between the development of new technology and application in the market.

In this respect, increasing expertise is not a goal in itself, but translating expertise into innovation and industrial success, however, is.

Universities and companies therefore need to work more closely together.

As is the case in the United States, the work of scientists should alternate between academia and industry.

Commissioner Busquin has now indicated how a European research area could be brought about.

However, he mainly focuses on optimising the infrastructure by, among other things, incorporating centres of excellence into a network and by setting up Virtual Centres.

But I believe that in order to bring about a European research area, we will need more than measures in the sphere of infrastructure.

Infrastructures do not innovate, neither do electronic networks, although they are a prerequisite.

But a European research area can only be created if, in addition to an advanced infrastructure, we also have a European identity and European creativity.

In my view, the potential of women has been neglected for too long in this respect.

My final point concerns the lack of a Community patent.

The existing European patent system causes fragmentation and leads to considerable extra costs.

A patent application in Europe is ten times more expensive than it is in the US and far more involved.

Not only do we not have a Community patent; the mechanisms to help small companies protect their patents are also lacking.

Will the Commissioner consult Mr Bolkestein to do something about this?

After all, small- and medium-sized companies do not have the means to pay for expensive legal procedures.

Finally, I would like to state that Europe needs a joint research policy which accommodates both applied and fundamental research in various technical specialist fields and which takes into account the fact that innovations often emerge at the interface of different scientific disciplines.

In future, new employment could mainly be created within the specialist areas of bio-technology and ICT, but also research into human and social sciences will remain necessary in the European Union, with its large diversity of cultures.

I would like to thank my colleagues for their kind cooperation.

Mr President, I have to say with great regret that I disagree with my colleague, Mrs Plooij-Van Gorsel, on one point, namely this: if there is any end worth pursuing in human life it is knowledge for knowledge' s own sake.

If there is any impulse which contributes to good research it is the impulse of pure curiosity.

It has been work done out of pure curiosity for the sake of knowledge as an end in itself which has, in the end, produced the big spin-offs that make a real difference.

I agree with her, however, that it is not enough to justify spending public money on the ground that somebody suffers from acute curiosity.

Therefore, it is the promise of long-term applicability and long-term economic contribution that justifies the expenditure of public funds.

But we must remember that public funds will not be well spent unless they are spent on people who have the drive of curiosity and the commitment to knowledge for its own sake.

That is something which we in Europe forget at our peril.

It is mentioned in clauses 'n' and 'o' of the preamble. I am very grateful for that.

Indeed I am very grateful to Mrs Plooij-Van Gorsel for the way in which she has worked into the report of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy practically all the points that were contained in the draft opinion from the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market for which I was responsible and which is the reason for my addressing you tonight.

The whole is better than the sum of its two parts.

It was very good of her to work it in so effectively.

The amendments by Mr Pietrasanta and Mrs Maes, which add the points about sustainability, environmental goods and health, to the other economic points that we have been making, are important and should be adopted.

There is indeed a European crisis in research funding.

It must go up to 3% from the current pathetic 1.8% - about half of what our Japanese and American friends and competitors put in.

We should improve the European patent.

Subsidiarity is all-important; subsidiarity, as the Commissioner has said, in its broadest sense - regions contributing to research as well as Member States and the Commission, right down to the research team.

They are the people at the sharp end.

We must make sure that we never have systems of research support that are so over-burdened with bureaucracy, with application mechanisms so difficult to penetrate that we use resources in applying for research funds that should be spent doing the research itself.

Simplicity is all and subsidiarity means, in this context, simplicity and an appropriate period of research review.

We need due and proper attention to mobility and all that goes with it, proper research careers throughout Europe, the chance for people to gain employment in research and to move freely.

The omens are not entirely good.

We have seen, in the case of the foreign language lecturers in Italy, that 12 years have passed with immobility enshrined in European law because the right to free movement without regard to nationality has been denied and has not yet been effectively enforced by the Commission.

We really must insist that improvement is achieved here and is carried through from the teaching community into the closely allied research community.

In short, we must do at Community and Union level the things that can only be done at those levels and push the rest down.

All that is stated in paragraph 40 of the report.

We must also be better at developing and applying the knowledge we achieve.

My colleague in Edinburgh, Professor Salter, has developed a device for destroying mines safely.

It has never been taken up industrially.

Many good ideas that are developed do not get taken up.

Mr President, I have great pleasure in responding on behalf of the EPP and ED Group, and on behalf of my colleague, Mrs Quisthoudt-Rowohl, who was the shadow rapporteur in the Industry Committee but who unfortunately cannot be here tonight.

I have the pleasure of shadowing Mr MacCormick in the Legal Affairs Committee.

You have already heard that this is indeed a formidable combination and an extremely comprehensive and thorough report from Mrs Plooij-Van Gorsel, but Mr MacCormick added his own distinctive touches to the report, the flavour of which you have just heard.

Clearly, the thrust of the Commission' s thinking that has gone into this report and indeed our response has focused on two aspects: competitiveness and coordination, because research capability combined with the ability to translate that research into products and services of real commercial value is going to be the key to the competitiveness of the European Union and the enlarged Union into this new century.

We really need to make better use of all the intellectual capabilities that we have across the European Union by improving ways of working together, particularly by better focusing our efforts, by not duplicating that work, by bringing together the original thinkers that Mr MacCormick was talking about.

Anyone who has worked in research will know that if you get people together you spark new and creative ideas all the time.

That activity cannot really be achieved by a lot of centralisation.

The Commission has a job to do as a catalyst for the process.

As Mr MacCormick says, we have to get people across the Union together talking region to region, university to university.

We have to have better information networks, we have to have this exchange of information horizontally, not coming into the centre and going out again.

We have now fantastic new tools to be able to do that.

After all, the Internet was a tool intended to facilitate research networking.

That is what it was originally designed to do and we now have the ability to use it and to think about how we are going to develop the telecommunications capability, the ways of using it, the structure that we talked about in our early debate on telecommunications, the idea of virtual centres of excellence.

That, I think, is a factor of very great importance in trying to achieve this focus and this synthesis of ideas.

If anything should be brought forward very quickly in a pilot stage by Mr Busquin and his team, it is the idea of moving into the virtual centres of excellence and achieving progress in certain key areas.

The second point I want to make links in with our competitiveness.

I echo very much the closing phrases of Mrs Plooij-Van Gorsel to us just now: we have to encourage research and development of skills on taking products to market.

We have to improve the ways that we do that.

The processes of original design are prototyping, testing and making.

We have to reduce the time to market, to take these ideas and move them out to consumers as soon as possible, to make products simply, quickly, more effectively, more flexibly.

Those are very important skills that we need to develop and research has a very important part to play in that.

In welcoming Mrs Plooij-Van Gorsel' s report, we are anticipating the next stage, Mr Busquin, in meeting these challenges that we have thrown down.

We look to you to turn these proposals into tangible ideas to achieve the objectives that we all share.

Mr President, Commissioner, the communication under discussion forms an important introduction to closer cooperation in the field of research.

As things are now, resources are wasted due to overlapping and lack of coordination.

On behalf of the ELDR Group, I wish to thank the rapporteur, Mrs Plooij-Van Gorsel, for a good report and for her extremely enthusiastic work for this cause: your views have the full support of my Group.

The statistics indicated in the communication regarding the poor level of investment by EU countries in research are cause for concern.

Even worse is the fact that the gap with respect to the USA is widening.

However, some Member States have made considerable investments in research, and this appears to have paid dividends, particularly in the area of information technology.

While I have the floor, I would like to bring up a few additional points.

I would prefer to talk about cooperation or strategy, rather than research policy.

The word policy has a connotation of activities being closely controlled by Brussels.

In research, however, objectives for activities should not be defined at too detailed a level.

Each research community is best aware of its own needs for investment and development - these should not be too tightly controlled by policy.

The participation of women in scientific research within the EU continues to be too fragmented.

More tangible action must be incorporated in the programmes in order to promote this participation.

Researcher exchange programmes and interaction between research teams are matters which deserve our full support.

They are a means of disseminating information and skills; these activities will create true European cooperation - networks which will also bear fruit later on.

The COST secretariat has already produced some commendable work.

Its position as research coordinator should be further strengthened.

Mr President, it is, of course, essential to develop a European research area, but this must not operate simply in areas neglected by the Member States.

It must be built openly, sharing competences and resources at as early a stage as possible, in order to ensure optimum synergy.

I wish to thank Mrs Plooij-Van Gorsel for her very dynamic work on this report.

We must naturally consider the economic impact and job creation, as our fellow Member, Mr Desama, said. In the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance, we do not give priority to the pursuit of competition and competitiveness at any price, or to the commercialisation of research.

Both fundamental and applied research must, above all, retain public support and a public dimension.

We are opposed to the areas of biotechnology focused on genetic manipulation or patenting the living organism. On the other hand, we are in favour of research focusing on sustainable technologies, particularly in the areas of the environment and health.

As the Committee of the Regions advocated in Mrs Blandin' s report, we wish to emphasise support for decentralised research, the formation of networks, collaboration with the regions.

For example, the cooperation which has developed through the ecosites, in the field of ecotechnologies, according to the criteria of sustainable development, is appropriate to local development and to supporting SMBs and SMIs.

Europe may be a significant driving force in this field.

I should also like to stress the aid which we wish to provide for new information and communications technologies by developing virtual laboratories for data collection, analysis and diagnosis, and prevention in the area of major risks.

There is here a potential which can only be realised fully at European level, in collaboration with universities, centres of excellence and the authorities.

Finally, I should like to flag the interest we have in the Joint Research Centre, a subject that is well worth thinking carefully about.

Its nuclear bias, which was topical when it was set up because of the involvement of Euratom, must now be reconsidered.

It is not a matter of duplicating the installations or the research carried out in some European Union Member States but instead of developing, as Mrs McNally suggests, a shared system of technical and scientific references for political applications.

In this respect, there is also a need for serious thinking about the STOA.

In conclusion, I wish to thank our Commissioner, Mr Philippe Busquin, for undertaking, as soon as he arrived, this investigation into a European research area which we support.

He did not neglect the areas of schemes on behalf of young people and the participation of women in research and, in continuing liaison with the Member States and with Parliament, he is working towards developing a knowledge-based Europe in the latest fields, without neglecting social and human aspects.

Mr President, Commissioner, considerable research is indeed essential to be able to make sense of the 27 recitals and 60 paragraphs of a report which has reached oversized proportions due to the studies of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy and which contains absolutely everything, albeit in occasionally vague and often inexact terms.

Let us begin, however, in a spirit of constructive criticism, by welcoming the fact that this contribution towards achieving better integration of the European scientific community seeks to safeguard the balance between fundamental and applied research in order to combat the brain drain, to prioritise the problem of unemployment among young researchers within a European policy which is aware of the reality of the situation, and to recognise the leading role played by businesses in research and development.

We might then, also, reiterate what the report said, by emphasising the risk that concentrating research infrastructures, with a view to establishing a cost-effective critical mass, would represent for the peripheral regions, which are, in general, increasingly being disregarded by European programmes.

Attention should also be drawn to the need to adhere strictly to the principle of subsidiarity, in order to leave the Member States and, through them, the regions with genuine local driving forces for research centres in direct contact with the worlds of business and academia, the ability to define their own priorities and methodologies under their own responsibility.

Finally, let us dare to hope that your laudable concern to develop communications and translation services in order to eliminate the language barrier to the desirable synergy between the work of our respective researchers is not a cover for a further attempt to promote one of the Union' s languages above all the others, a language whose imperialism would be no less neutral here than elsewhere.

Mrs Plooij-Van Gorsel, the Union for a Europe of Nations Group is going to vote in favour of your report, but I would ask you, in practical terms, will it be effective enough for us to achieve our shared goal, which is high-level scientific knowledge generating improved performance in every field?

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, Mrs Plooij-Van Gorsel' s excellent report, which we have before us, on the European Commission communication, "Towards a European research area" , has aroused genuine interest in the House judging by the fact that almost 150 amendments have been tabled.

Clearly, the development of research within the European Union is one of the keys to the future.

The twenty-first century will be the century of knowledge and grey matter.

Progress in communications effectively increases the rate of dissemination of knowledge, as the development of the Internet demonstrates, and is a powerful factor in promoting economic growth.

In the broadest sense, then, research will, more than ever, be a fundamental element of future development.

According to the figures made available by the Commission, Europe is definitely lagging behind the United States.

Here are some examples of this: the average investment in research for the European Union as a whole is no more than 1.8% of GDP, as opposed to 2.8% in the United States; the number of European graduate students studying in the United States is twice that of American students in Europe.

On this subject, the proposals of both the Commission and the Plooij-Van Gorsel report lead me to make a few observations.

The first is that European investment in research is at least as important as the European research area.

In the United States, there is rather less concern for semantics and more for practical action.

The second observation is that approximately two thirds of research is undertaken by private companies and that the European Union must take this situation into consideration when focusing its resources.

My third observation is that we must absolutely avoid anything which, from a distance or close up, looks like what has just been referred to as a master plan for European research.

Research is, first and foremost, a matter for freedom and not for planning.

This is all included in the Commission communication and the report by our fellow Member.

There is, however, no prioritisation in the proposals, and this is something I would like to suggest.

This prioritisation should focus primarily on researchers and businesses.

As far as researchers are concerned, their standard of living throughout Europe must be enhanced.

As far as businesses are concerned, research work must be encouraged.

My conclusion is as follows: that we should first back the people involved, then business and, finally, that we should ensure that the European Union does not hinder the activities or the development of either party.

This is what our approach must be.

(The President cut the speaker off)

Mr President, I wish to thank Mrs Plooij-Van Gorsel for her usual very good report.

I thank the Commissioner, whose timing is very good and so is his idea of launching this debate.

There is indeed a growing feeling of unease at the lack of coordination in European science and research.

The response has been positive, as the Commissioner knows from his contacts throughout Europe, including a recent visit to Cambridge.

We are looking forward to seeing his analysis of the results of the consultation.

There is a growing awareness in Europe of the dimensions of the threat from the very well-resourced, very well-targeted United States of America.

Frankly, the EU is not punching its weight in research, although some Member States are very good.

I would name Finland, Sweden and countries like the Republic of Ireland, which have made good progress.

Apart from industrial competitiveness, of course, as Mr Desama says, we have serious environmental and social problems which need research to put them right.

A target of 3% of GDP on research is realistic and essential, as is the recruitment of far more scientists, including women.

Please do not underestimate the potential of the Joint Research Centre, which is itself a scientific centre for policy - a reference centre for policy - and is ideally suited to the role of networking the centres of excellence.

It is itself a centre of excellence in many areas.

I strongly support paragraphs 16 and 17, which call for informing the European public about scientific achievements and looking at ethical questions.

We look forward to regular reports from the Commissioner about the implementation and realisation of this very exciting and essential project.

Mr President, it is impossible to say something meaningful in two minutes about such a challenging report as the one written by Mrs Plooij without getting very frustrated, because one could say so much more and, more to the point, would want to say so much more.

I would like to congratulate the Commissioner on his ambition, which is considerable.

Trying to create a European research area is an ambitious plan, because this research space is currently lacking and we only have ourselves to blame. We make insufficient resources available, although we all - and Mrs McNally underlined this a moment ago - acknowledge the link between progress, development, and creating prosperity and jobs.

This is evident to all of us, yet our governments fail to set aside sufficient funds.

This is true for the Member States and regions, some of whose percentage levels are shamefully low.

We should, as it were, sound the praises of certain Member States and regions, but should not work on averages.

This is why it is good to emphasise cooperation.

Pyramids and hierarchies are not really of much use here, because we know that talent bubbles up from below and from all those regions and all those milieus where talent breeds, both male and female, although female talent - and this has been pointed out many times before here - can only ascend to the very pinnacle of academia very slowly.

And really, the absence of this is something we only have ourselves to blame for.

If our organisation of the scientific environment lags behind, we will not achieve a European research area.

After all, it is exactly this area, where people can communicate a lot more freely with each other than before, which has to ensure that scientists feel at home in Europe.

I really have to ask the Members to exercise some self-discipline. I am sorry to interrupt you, but time goes on and, at this rate, we will be here until gone midnight, and surely that is not what we want.

We cannot do this to the Commissioner either.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, cooperation in terms of research is difficult in Europe, far more difficult than it is in the United States and this is why Commissioner Busquin' s communication is so significant.

Investment in research and in cooperation must lead to more economic growth and more employment.

This effort deserves all our support, and this is why I can give my full backing to the report by Mrs Plooij, to whom, by the way, I would like to convey my sincerest compliments.

But I would prefer it if we were a little more precise in our debate.

We have to ascertain that not all research leads to more economic growth or more employment.

The demand for research is huge where supporting policy choices, risk analyses, environmental effect reports, monitors and comparative research is concerned.

It is all part of the preparation or assessment of political decisions in the environmental sector in the area of food or public health.

In these particular areas, European cooperation is meaningful.

The Joint Research Centres, the JRCs, have many examples of sound cooperation projects.

In many research areas, the JRC researchers find themselves in a situation much like a spider in a web.

Where research in support of policy is concerned, initiatives from the Commission are therefore vital in order to prevent work from being duplicated, to avoid fragmentation and to ensure that the best measuring methods and the best techniques become the benchmark.

But in this type of work, no major spin-offs in the employment sphere can be expected outside the research centres.

There is also great demand for applied research, which can be expected to have a far greater impact on employment.

But European policy could restrict itself to creating appropriate conditions, and practical obstacles should be cleared away.

I would like to finish off by saying a few words on basic research.

Research situated between applied and basic research now has a lower profile but remains significant.

Many fundamental questions in the fields of natural and life sciences remain unanswered.

It is precisely in these spheres that coordination of national research efforts is of major importance.

Mr President, I would like to thank the rapporteur for her invaluable work.

On account of the amendments tabled in committee, this report ended up being more wide-ranging; when dealing with issues related to research areas, we must not focus solely on scientific communities.

The role of the SME sector as a locomotive force for innovation and research work must also be clearly borne in mind.

The Commission' s communication provides an unnecessarily one-sided view of the challenges of European research.

It is obvious that, in the preparation of this communication, there has been no horizontal utilisation of the expertise of the various directorates.

Since the discussion on the research area touches, for example, on the enlargement process of the Union and on the vitality of the SME sector, one would have wished that the Commission' s communication had presented more visions and concrete content.

It is not enough to talk in broad terms about the competitiveness of the Union.

Keywords in research policy are flexibility, global thinking, and the more effective use of resources than at present.

The self-directed nature of science and the Member States' own research policy priorities must be accorded sufficient space.

It is therefore necessary to give careful thought to what will be required in the future of the joint research centres highlighted in the Commission' s proposal.

On no account is it appropriate to enlarge the role of the Union' s research centres in such a way that the operations of national research centres are made more difficult in the context of resource reallocation.

Most of the added value of the internal market approach in research will be acquired specifically through the more even distribution of the research and know-how which is funded by non-public resources.

Practical experience has shown that by working within framework programmes it is not possible to react sufficiently flexibly to problems which demand rapid action, such as the BSE crisis.

Increasing, for instance, the mobility of researchers according to need and enhancing the cooperation between the scientific communities of the EU and Eastern Europe will create a reliable and credible basis for research projects.

In this discussion, particular attention must also be paid to the position of women in European research policy; the body of technical experts in particular - which actually suffers from a labour shortage - is alarmingly male-dominated.

The EU must accept that one of the most important challenges for its training and research policy is to awaken women' s interest in this sector.

Mr President, Mrs Plooij-Van Gorsel, ladies and gentlemen, I am personally delighted to have this opportunity to express an opinion on the Commissioner' s communication and to be able to tell him that it is a document of extremely high quality which, as we have seen again this evening, has provided the basis for a relevant debate on revitalising research in Europe.

We have effectively entered the knowledge society, which has led us to put research back at the heart of our society.

In Europe, however, as many people have said, the position of research looks worrying if one looks at the figures.

It is therefore necessary, as a matter of urgency, to adopt an overall strategy at European level in order to make up for lost time.

It is not a matter of casting doubt on the efficiency of the FRDPs. Their results are plain to see.

It must be noted, however, that new initiatives need to be adopted in order to decompartmentalise Member States' national systems which today represent nothing more than a duplication of efforts.

Among the many measures which must be implemented, this evening I shall mention, in particular, the training and the mobility of researchers, to go back to a previous debate which involved the Commissioner and researchers from my own region.

I am speaking, therefore, to voice their concerns, for we are not training enough scientific researchers and even fewer European researchers.

The training of researchers should therefore include a European dimension, which would offer them greater mobility.

Schemes do exist, but, in the real world, before and during implementation, there are administrative obstacles to mobility, such as welfare cover, which discourage many researchers.

I shall end by saying that we must also devote ourselves to informing the citizens, in whom scientific progress raises as much hope as concern.

I therefore hope that, in June, our ministers will be able to approve the rapid establishment of a whole series of building sites in Europe, on the basis of the Commissioner' s proposals.

Mr President, I would like to congratulate Commissioner Busquin for deciding and having the courage to create a European research area, bearing in mind that, in the field of knowledge, we have always fought hard for the principle of solidarity.

I am a member of the Committee on Culture and in fact Parliament has not taken up the opinion of this committee.

I am the only person from that committee who is speaking in this debate.

I very much regret the fact that the contribution of the Committee on Culture has not been allowed to enrich the debate.

In this respect I would like to offer some constructive criticism.

Firstly, I would like to say that this is a laudable and courageous piece of work, because subsidiarity is a straitjacket which is holding Europeans back despite the brilliance of their desires and their minds. Nevertheless, it lacks a parallel project, which is concerned with human resources.

Much is said about money and companies, but we never take into account - or at least we only do so in the small print and indirectly - the fact that it is a question of human resources and that therefore research requires training, training and more training.

In Europe there are no training programmes for researchers.

FEDER and the FEDER projects do not cover grant holders.

Furthermore, the fifth research plan only includes one person per project, although it is impossible to carry out a far-reaching project with grant holders alone.

The personnel available to us include very few post-doctoral teachers and we do not have sufficient staff.

How can we talk about mobility if we do not have researchers?

This is the great challenge we have to face and, in this case, I would support Mr Rübig and others who have proposed specific training programmes.

We must support the universities and researchers because, in Europe, working in research means sacrifices and a career full of risks and very few rewards and, of course, no economic reward.

I repeat that we must recycle our teachers.

Only by means of a strategic European resources plan can we do so.

Lastly, I would like to express my fear that only centres of excellence will be recognised.

Mr President, I will confine myself to stressing three points tackled by Commissioner Busquin which are also referred to in the report under debate.

The first concerns the close relationship between research, economic growth and employment.

In order to respond to the challenge represented by the United States, the Union as a whole and certain countries in particular must allocate a higher proportion of their resources to research and facilitate investment by private companies.

I subscribe to the view that we need to propose tax relief, harmonised at European level, as a guideline for the Member States.

Point two: research and development have generated an extremely well integrated system.

In some areas, it is not easy to distinguish between basic and applied research.

However, public financing and the European programmes need to target chiefly medium- and long-term economic and non-economic objectives, whereas competence for market-related research should lie chiefly with the firms.

Thirdly, the tertiarisation of research policies and the consolidation of the role of the regions: The territorial aspect of research policies is important chiefly in terms of the transfer of scientific and technological knowledge towards the small- and medium-sized enterprises which characterise many industrial districts.

Small- and medium-sized enterprises are one of European industry' s strong points, in certain countries in particular, but they are still poorly integrated into the research system.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, first of all, I would like to add my thanks to those that have been expressed already.

I should also like to thank Mrs Plooij-Van Gorsel for the excellent report she has drawn up within a very short time limit.

I should like to thank Mr MacCormick of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market and all of you for your contributions, as well as for your contributions to the debate this evening.

As I have already said, I believe that this debate requires collective action and that you, as Members of Parliament, can play a decisive role in relations with the scientific community and industry. Rest assured that I and the other members of the Commission will be ready to pursue this dialogue and this debate tomorrow.

In this respect, I think that this Parliament resolution is going to provide strong democratic support for the text ratified by the Lisbon Council which, moreover, set practical goals and deadlines.

We should realise the extent to which the meeting of the Heads of State and Government in Lisbon served to highlight - what I believe is very important - the key role of research policy, as we have again pointed out this evening, and to acknowledge the importance of this role in the advent of a knowledge-based economy and society.

We are at a juncture which gives us hope that greater and more crucial progress may be made in this area.

In addition, I should like to stress the importance of consulting the scientific community, with its awareness of developments, but also the industrial world, which can gauge the importance of the issues at stake.

Let me now outline a few points in the resolution, not in order to reopen the debate, Mr President, given the late hour, but in order to put a few brief comments to you.

I consider that the concept of centres of excellence is one worth developing further and, in this connection, there is one essential principle, and that is that excellence is the condition sine qua non for scientific and technological progress.

Such excellence does exist in Europe, in all the Member States, but at an inadequate level of critical mass, and this is a situation which could be improved.

This is the significance of all these networks of centres of excellence that must be created without necessarily specifying the exact infrastructures involved.

It is a matter of human resources, but it is something that must be set up in order to have the ability to raise levels in Europe.

And, as Mr Harbour pointed out, this excellence may also come in a virtual form in the modern technologies and high-speed networks we wish to see set up.

As regards fundamental and applied research, I think this is a matter of balance.

These two aspects are closely linked.

Everyone accepts this, both the world of industry and the world of research, of course, in the same way as they accept multidisciplinarity, which is one of the results of scientific developments.

In order to create the necessary dynamic, it is therefore essential to develop the concept of benchmarking.

I think this is an instrument which will make it possible, at European level, to create this dynamic, and also to instigate proactive and open coordination.

I think establishing a patent is a condition sine qua non, as has been adequately pointed out.

Mr Bolkestein, who is responsible for the internal market, is well aware of this.

Indeed, I should like to take this opportunity to thank Parliament for having, with a view to the Intergovernmental Conference, insisted on initiating a discussion on a European legal body, since this is an essential condition for bringing about this Community patent.

Finally, as far as small- and medium-sized businesses are concerned, the matter of the patent is a crucial factor, quite apart from more specific elements.

The aspect of regional development has been stressed, and I attach great importance to this, as successful experiments have been conducted in some regions and these should be exhibited as an example throughout Europe.

I also attach great importance to the link between research and the Structural Funds, not forgetting the role of the European Investment Bank.

In connection with this, discussions have been held with the European Investment Bank and schemes are underway to ensure that the EIB has a still more dynamic role in matters related to innovation and transposition and, since this was mentioned, that includes with candidate countries.

The Joint Research Centre and its specialist role have been stressed, and the goal of 3% of GDP is, I believe, an ambitious but necessary goal in all Member States.

So, to be brief, I should simply like to inform Parliament of the forthcoming stages.

I would first of all like to emphasise just how important it was that Parliament expressed its opinion today.

This is why I wished to thank Mrs Plooij-Van Gorsel for drawing up her report so quickly, and also all the Members of Parliament for debating the matter in such detail within such a short time period.

The next stage, then, is the Council of Ministers responsible for Research, which will take place on 15 June.

This report will provide practical examples to support the determination that we must display.

For I have clearly understood that practical action is needed.

So, regarding the practical action, let me quickly list a few points, starting with benchmarking.

With national research policies, the methodology exists.

I think that the Member States accept this methodology, with the establishment of a high level group of representatives.

Initial results will be available by the end of the year.

A map of areas of excellence in Europe is being drawn up, with the cooperation of the national specialist institutes.

That is no surprise to anyone, I think.

I am hopeful that this map will also be ready by the end of the year.

The mobility of researchers presupposes the mobility of workers in general.

The ambition of Mrs Diamantopoulou and myself is to set up a group made up of representatives from each Member State in order to identify where the obstacles lie.

Regarding Women and Science, in fact, on the initiative of Parliament, a sizeable group of five hundred women has been set up.

You are familiar with the very interesting report that this group produced, which triggered policy in each of the Member States. I shall be able to give you the results of this in the near future.

Finally, as regards electronic networks, Mr Liikanen and I wish to increase these to several gigabytes very soon.

That, Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, is what I wanted to tell you briefly, given the time constraints and that I do not want to detain you further.

I do, however, wish to express my heartfelt thanks for the interest you have shown in this debate.

I believe we have to set up a dynamic, one that must be enhanced, and I promise that I shall give you progress reports on a regular basis.

I hope that, together, we shall be able to open up the European research area that I believe in so strongly.

Thank you very much for your contribution, Commissioner.

Given the time, we should not hold lengthy discussions.

I am not a spokesperson for this debate but I would nevertheless like to congratulate Mrs Plooij-Van Gorsel at this stage on this important report.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon.

The next item is the report (A5-0125/2000) by Mrs Smet and Mrs Gröner, on behalf of the Committee on Women' s Rights and Equal Opportunities, on the follow-up to the Beijing Action Platform [2000/2020(INI)].

Mr President, this initiative report is the European Parliament' s contribution to the special session of the United Nations General Assembly which will be held in New York in three weeks' time and where the actions of the past five years will be assessed as a follow-up to the World Conference on Women in Beijing and where, at the same time, a declaration will be issued to re-establish the commitments made and to see what needs to be done in the next five years.

As such, it is an important report, because it will be the only report from the European Parliament.

I hope that we will be given the opportunity - and this is also a request to the Commission - to do some preparatory work with the Commission before we leave for New York to ensure that we are singing from the same hymn sheet.

I think it is useful to be on the same wavelength because, as regards women' s liberation, we could expect Europe to play some sort of a pioneering role.

Europe has done this in the past and we must be able to continue to do this.

But before I talk about this pioneering role, I would like to say a few words about the assessment itself.

Commissioner, it is particularly difficult to carry out an assessment if there is no data available to check on the precise extent of progress made by the different European countries over the past few years.

There are reports on the twelve topics which we need to discuss in New York for each country, which show exactly how much progress has been made with the assessment.

I am therefore delighted that you announced in the discussion on the fifth action programme that you would like to set up a kind of observatory where an effort will be made to collate all possible gender-related data. After all, there is an enormous gap in this field.

I would like to direct my second point to Parliament itself.

The efforts we needed to make in order to finish this report suggest that the Secretariat of the Women' s Committee is heavily understaffed.

There was very little in the way of cooperation, and had it not been for the fact that Mrs Gröner and myself had hard-working collaborators, then there would probably not have been a report now.

It is a disgrace for Parliament that other committees can apparently acquire excellent secretariats and well-equipped secretariats with many staff, but that this is not possible for the Women' s Committee.

It may be useful that we, together with the women involved, should take an initiative.

That is all I have to say as regards assessment and I will not touch on it any further.

For the next five years, I believe that the action programme, the five-year programme which the Commission is presenting for discussion at the moment, is of huge importance.

It obviously comprises the traditional themes, which is quite normal because, although the world moves on, these themes are still on the agenda.

Admittedly, there are new emphases but, at the end of the day, they are the same recurring themes.

The first theme I would like to mention is the world of employment and the new emphases which should, in my view, be applied.

These include the new technologies and the fact that there are too few women in this sector, if any.

This was also said a moment ago.

Other matters to be emphasised are the division between work and family, as is provided for in the employment guidelines, and equal pay for equal work, something which I find the Commission is not emphasising enough and which is receiving insufficient attention.

There is still a chasm between men and women in terms of wages.

The Commission has made efforts, as has Europe, but mainly in the political sphere.

I think that efforts should also be made with regard to both sides of industry.

Far more attention should be paid to them since they manage and control a large part of social life.

On the theme of violence, too little attention is being paid to violence within the family, in my opinion.

Attention is being paid to violence in the work sphere, and so forth, but not so much within the family.

In my view, more attention should be paid to the media, which is such a determining factor in social life.

Women are very much absent in the media.

As for women' s rights and human rights, I hope that some progress can be made at the Intergovernmental Conference.

Finally, I already said that Europe is expected to play a pioneering role.

I would mention two areas, in particular.

Firstly, if we grant development aid or if we have contacts with third countries, we should not just prescribe conditions with regard to the economic position of women.

We are now familiar with this.

We know that in many developing countries, the economy is carried by women, and we support this.

What we do not emphasise enough in our contacts with third countries is that human rights should be respected with regard to women, too.

What is happening in Afghanistan is unjustifiable.

It is unjustifiable that, in a number of countries, female circumcision is still practised and that we maintain the best relations with these countries as a matter of course.

Secondly, with regard to the Union' s enlargement to include the former Eastern Bloc countries, it will be vital that the screening report to be compiled by the Commission should give a sound account of what is happening there, because there are signs of regress instead of progress in this regard.

Mr President, Commissioner, the special session of the United Nations General Assembly, which will be held at the beginning of June under the banner 'Women 2000: Gender equality, development and peace for the 21st Century' , will be of enormous importance to the situation of women.

The monitoring of the application of the Beijing Action Platform reveals that the greatest concerns, in relation to the proposed objectives, are still education and training, power and decision making, health, poverty and violence.

The social changes of recent years have affected women in a special way.

The increase in the elderly population has had a great effect on the lives of women who, in general, when they are no longer looking after their children, have to look after their parents.

Despite considerable progress in terms of the situation of women, there are still considerable differences, especially discrimination at work and different wages for the same job.

The majority and, in many cases, all of the responsibility for domestic tasks falls to women.

The situation of women with family responsibilities, combined with the difficulties in the labour market, have led to a term which is explicit as well as unfair: the feminisation of poverty.

We still require initiatives which help to give women access to the labour market and allow them full professional development, to which end we will need to facilitate women' s 'other' work through nurseries and financial aid.

Men will have to take more family responsibilities and adapt to a society which is constantly changing and which has modified their traditional roles.

The information society requires increasing numbers of people with technological training, which women must get involved in, since this is an area for which they are particularly well-equipped.

If the number of women involved in decision making were to increase, it would become easier to resolve the problems facing them.

A lot of progress has been made, but there are still political and economic areas in which women are under-represented.

Amongst the problems which women are unfortunately facing at the moment, we must mention the violence directed at them: domestic violence, armed conflict and trafficking in women, which has been increasing in recent years.

This is a form of violence against their person, their fundamental rights and their dignity.

The Treaty of Amsterdam provides for the integration of the objectives of equality into Community policies and, especially in Article 141, positive actions in the field of employment.

Employment is usually also a solution to other problems of marginalisation, economic dependence, lack of personal freedom, etc. The fifth Community Action Plan will have to deal with the problems still existing through a budgetary provision which will allow programmes to be implemented in the most urgent areas.

The cooperation of the media is essential to achieving these objectives.

Mr President, 'Half the sky is borne on the shoulders of women' , a successful man once said.

But the heavens are not enough.

Women account for more than half the earth' s population and yet remain unheard and under-represented within most political, economic and social spheres.

In the course of the centuries, women have demanded their rights as full citizens.

They have ranged from, in the northern hemisphere, female campaigners for the right to vote to, in the southern hemisphere, groups opposing genital mutilation.

In the course of the Beijing Conference in 1995, a common action plan was decided upon for these different groups of women. This was a milestone in the recognition of women' s rights as being integral to human rights in general.

Just about all the governments of the world endorsed the Beijing Conference' s action plan.

The Beijing Declaration distinguishes twelve critical areas and defines views and long-term objectives which should be adopted by governments, the United Nations, national movements and private industry in order to improve the conditions under which women live.

Five years later, discrimination against women is still widespread, and violence against women is still a global phenomenon.

A glass ceiling bars women from advancement in the professions, administration and politics.

Women constitute the overwhelming majority of the one billion people who are illiterate and who live in the most extreme poverty, and decisions affecting women are still made by men.

It is high time that, in the course of the Beijing + 5 Conference in June, concrete decisions are taken which will actually result in the objectives of the Beijing Action Platform being realised.

The report we are voting on tomorrow emphasises that progress within all twelve areas is necessary if women are fully to be able to obtain their share of human rights.

A threefold strategy is needed if the Conference is not just to be another exercise in rhetoric.

First of all, the world' s governments must adopt a concrete action plan and again undertake to fulfil the Beijing objectives.

Secondly, they must pledge financial resources with a view to implementing the decisions and, thirdly, supervisory tools must be created for the purpose of monitoring implementation.

These three tools have so far been missing in implementing the Beijing Action Platform.

The fact that the world' s governments refuse to acknowledge that, from the cradle to the grave, girls and women are exploited and persecuted has, throughout the ages, been the most flagrant and far-reaching violation of human rights.

This is something which the Committee on Women' s Rights and Equal Opportunities wants to change.

Women should not just bear half the sky on their shoulders, but also have the right to take responsibility for decisions affecting our entire earth. Is that not so, Commissioner?

Mr President, we are going to New York first and foremost to discuss the position of women globally.

Naturally, there is a need in the European Union, too, to improve the position of women in all walks of life, but we are now talking more about a worldwide conference.

In my opinion, a worthwhile contribution to this event would be the concept that the empowerment of women can be regarded as a strategy for the development of society as a whole.

By investing in women, we will be helping whole communities and societies on the road to development.

The evidence in support of this is very convincing; many problems can be overcome by investing, for example, in the primary health care of women.

In the eradication of poverty, supporting women, for example by 'micro loans' (negligible amounts from our point of view) has proved a very sound strategy for promoting economic activity.

Education and training are, of course, the means for women to become members of full standing in society.

I believe that if there is anything we in the European Union can contribute to this conference, it would relate to the fact that we have launched this 'gender mainstreaming' process, which entails trying to involve the gender viewpoint in all decision making.

As all those present are well aware, this is not easy - we have a tremendous amount of work to do in this respect ourselves - but we can raise the issue that the role of women needs to be reassessed when it comes to questions of war and peace, for example.

Women are, to a very great extent, the victims and those who suffer in wars now.

Would it not be a good idea to debate what could be done by women to prevent or resolve these kind of present-day conflicts?

Five years ago, at the Beijing Conference, it was stated that women' s rights are human rights.

We quite agree with the rapporteur, Mrs Smet. We cannot accept what is happening to women in Afghanistan and we must promote the human rights of women at the New York Conference.

Mr President, we support the foundation work carried out by the co-rapporteurs, we support their approach and we support the fact that sound proposals continue to be produced, but when it comes to evaluating what has been achieved over the last five years - as has been said - we have no information, in either objective or more general terms, to provide a basis for planning new actions or finding means of rectifying failed past actions.

The European Commission will once again, therefore, be conspicuous for its grand proposals and the failure to follow them up with tangible actions.

In our opinion, on this occasion, it might be appropriate for the Union to adopt an initiative, a practical initiative which is a priority objective with set time frames.

We feel that, out of the vast amount of issues to be considered, female circumcision warrants particular attention.

We would like Mrs Diamantopoulou to inform us whether the clause on relations with third countries which deals with female circumcision is seen as particularly important and, in the interests of bringing the matter to a swift conclusion, we suggest that no further Union aid should be granted to any of those countries which permit or tolerate female circumcision.

This is a major issue, a practice so common and widespread that it is featuring increasingly, even in the European daily media.

- (EL) Mr President, Commissioner, I should like, as we are discussing the action platform on equality decided in Beijing in 1995, to take this opportunity to extol the role played, and the efforts made, by the UN on this issue and to remind the House of the important role played and the contribution made by the Union in adopting a common accepted action platform at worldwide level.

In view of the forthcoming UN conference in New York, I think it is opportune that we claim a more active and effective European and worldwide policy in all sectors, a policy which will reach as far as Afghanistan and the Gulf states, where women are still in a most unfortunate position and are denied fundamental human rights.

This does not, of course, mean that we underestimate the progress achieved and the European Union' s contribution to the dynamic presence of women in all professional and scientific circles, the performance of women at all levels of education and their successes wherever equal opportunity policies and the principle of meritocracy are applied.

However, despite the undisputed progress being made, serious problems of inequality and discrimination persist and have serious repercussions on the functioning of democracy and the failure to make full use of the valuable human resource which women represent comes at a huge economic and social cost.

This is why we need to move forward with a specific vision and specific plan, with strategies and mechanisms, with a precise timetable and indicators, with quantifiable targets so that we can appraise the preceding decade and accurately evaluate the progress made at the new UN Conference in 2005.

Today we need to extend our action to eradicate discrimination on the labour market, involve women in social dialogue and deal with violence against women.

We need to guarantee a fair redistribution of responsibilities and obligations between the two sexes, both in public and private life.

In short, we need to create a new institutional and social framework which reflects the changes which have taken place and which solves the problems and contradictions which arise from the new contract with the two sexes.

The European Union and the Member States must be on the front line of this fight.

- (EL) Mr President, I should like to start by congratulating Mrs Gröner and Mrs Smet on their exceptional and remarkable report.

Apart from the 28 specific recommendations, which are particularly helpful, both for Beijing and the Commission' s fifth programme - and I should like to assure you that complete account will be taken of them - I must also highlight the fact that they are accompanied by a particularly interesting political analysis containing information and views which is an excellent tool and which I think the Member States would be well advised to reproduce.

Five years on from Beijing, we shall be assessing the past five years.

As the speakers have said, a great deal has been done and a great deal remains to be done.

And, of course, Afghanistan will have to be discussed and reported and voted on in New York because it is one of the worst disgraces of our century, one of the worst disgraces of mankind in the year 2000.

We made commitments in 1995; these commitments have been honoured up to a point and we shall be analysing them in full at the Beijing Conference.

One question which arises is whether or not we have the information needed at European Union level.

I should like to inform you that the Commission has been endeavouring for a long time now to collate information on all the Member States, to obtain answers to questionnaires sent out more than once, to obtain answers to individual issues of legislation, infrastructures, action and statistics.

We have managed, after a great deal of trouble, I must admit, to collate a set of data and we shall be publishing a paper as quickly as possible - within a fortnight I hope - containing the data for 1999.

That was the reason for the delay.

As far as the report is concerned, I should like to refer to three points which, according to the questionnaires sent in from the countries of Europe, take priority there.

The first is new changes in the information society.

The new changes, which are changing the economy, society and the work model, are throwing up both huge challenges and huge problems, especially for the weaker groups, and huge problems for women, who are less involved in the new world of technologies and who, of course, have higher unemployment rates.

We therefore need here to highlight the new objective of education, lifelong learning, retraining and special programmes to ensure that women participate in the new information society and, hence, in the labour market.

The second point concerns democracy and is linked to the information society, which is creating a new type of communication between citizens and politicians and opening up a new route, which you need to be aware of and for which you need the right vehicle.

And, of course, there is the traditional problem of the representation of women, which all the speakers have already touched on.

The third point, which also proved to be the issue to which the Member States attach importance, is the issue of violence against women, the most important problem being trafficking in women, i.e. the modern version of the slave trade.

Unfortunately, ladies and gentlemen, we must assume that the new era is bringing with it not only electronic commerce, as defined in the economy, but also electronic commerce in women and children.

These are issues which call, of course, for innovative solutions and new approaches and cannot simply be seen as the price paid for the new era.

I think that these are the basic points which need to be assessed and, more importantly, where we need to renew our commitments.

I should like to stress that Beijing will obviously give rise to negotiating problems.

I agree that there will be centres of power and organised powers which will try to reverse all this progress and review the agenda which we have agreed on.

How we organise ourselves at all levels and how our lobby operates at all levels are extremely important, because we want to prevent any review of the agenda or a return to the past, renew our commitments and create new momentum so that our commitments are implemented in the new era.

I think that, since all negotiations depend on preparation and on being fully aware of one' s own situation and the situation of those sitting on the opposite side of the table, we at the Commission and the European Parliament need to cooperate very closely with the Portuguese Presidency.

It is, I think, superfluous, to assure you that the Commission - and I personally - am at the disposal of the Portuguese Presidency so that we can prepare for these negotiations in the best possible way.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon.

I would, by the way, like to congratulate all Members who are still present on their perseverance and I would also like to extend warm thanks to the staff who are still present for their prolonged efforts.

(The sitting was closed at 11.53 p.m.)

Address by Mr Kuçan, President of the Republic of Slovenia

In my capacity as President of the European Parliament, it is my honour and my very great pleasure to welcome Mr Milan Kuçan, President of the Republic of Slovenia.

This is the first time that we have had the opportunity to welcome you here, Mr President, and I am very pleased to do so.

Just ten years ago, on 8 April 1990, the first free, democratic elections were held in Slovenia, a high point in the Slovene spring.

This spring contained the seeds of the confrontations and tensions of the summer of 1991, during which Slovenia won its independence.

We are all, of course, still mindful of the images of those ten dramatic days in the summer of 1991.

At that time, the courage, love of freedom and determination of the Slovene people and their President eventually prevailed over the threats of violence.

And a free and democratic Slovenia was born.

This event at the same time marked a return to the shared European values of peace and freedom, democracy and respect for human rights.

These essential values of our European civilisation form the inalienable foundation for our joint actions, present and future.

The European Union is first and foremost a Community based on values.

I am pleased to see that after several decades of Communist dictatorship, Slovenia has enshrined these values as the foundations of the State.

And now Slovenia belongs to the greater European family which we hope to bring together in the near future.

In 1996, the Association Agreement enabled us to set up a joint European Parliament/Slovene Parliament parliamentary committee.

On 10 June 1996, your country submitted its formal application for membership of the European Union.

Negotiations began in March 1998, and I am aware that they are actively continuing under the leadership of the President of the Commission, Mr Romano Prodi, and Commissioner Verheugen.

We are aware that over the last ten years, in your capacity as President of Slovenia, you have played a key role in achieving positive development in your country.

I am therefore particularly pleased to welcome you here today.

You are most welcome, Mr President, and without further ado I shall give you the floor.

- Madam President, honourable Members, I am honoured to be able to speak in this august House.

I am especially pleased that this has been made possible for me on the 50th anniversary of Robert Schuman' s appeal to France, Germany and other countries to enter into a common economic policy on steel and coal.

That was the day when the process of European integration began.

It is your and our common European day of celebration, and I offer you my sincere congratulations.

I congratulate you with trust and faith in the European idea of association.

I am confirmed in this faith by the recent very successful visit by the distinguished President of the European Parliament, Mrs Fontaine, to Slovenia.

In her address to the Slovene Parliament, Mrs Fontaine expressed her clear commitment to furthering the project of a united Europe, saying: "It is important that we support the will to strengthen the special features of each of our countries.

We must therefore deepen the foundations of the European Union and prepare it for enlargement in such a way that it will be able tomorrow to maintain all its ability to function in response to challenges both internal and external.

This will be possible only on condition that we maintain the existing balance between the small and large countries, and continue on the path towards a Europe of citizens" .

This idea seems to me particularly important, for it emphasises coexistence.

Coexistence is the only real alternative for the future of humankind; including that of Europe.

Yet the question is: what will coexistence be founded upon?

My own firm conviction is that it should be founded, first and foremost, upon the experience we have brought with us and which has engendered the values that we have articulated as the quintessence of European democracy and declared as the principles binding together the very fabric of the new Europe.

The experience we carry into the third millennium is an experience of the rise and fall of colonial powers and ideological, political and social totalitarianism.

Set in counterpart to this, yet an integral part of our experience, is the ultimate establishment of the rule of law and human rights, the freedom of individuals and nations, democracy as the criterion of political power, social justice and stability as the goals to which we must constantly aspire.

Alongside experience, our coexistence should be founded upon a set of laws that will determine human life on the threshold of the third millennium and in which these values will be implemented and confirmed.

These are the laws of the global community.

For the moment, the global community seems limited to markets, economies and information and communication technology.

Politics is lagging behind this trend.

Yet the solid foundations of coexistence in the world demand globalised politics, which will be capable of establishing social coherence which will balance the effects of capital which has already been globalised.

Globalised politics presupposes that national politics and interests founded on the sovereignty of the nation state should be bound to the global politics of common responsibility.

This would be a kind of world 'domestic politics' , to which all countries would be bound.

It would be founded in part on the following elements: on the global spread of political and economic democracy, on binding standards of individual and collective human rights, on dialogue between different cultures, religions and civilisations, on opposition to nationalism and xenophobia, on a new balance between the economically developed and developing parts of the world, on the globalisation of learning, knowledge, research and information, on developing international and inter-regional cooperation, on constructing a social order based on the model of social justice and solidarity, on common security and defence and on the fight against organised crime.

With such politics we might seek a way of ensuring that the former ideological, political and military confrontations of the Cold War are not replaced by clashes of culture, religion and civilisation.

If we are to move towards worldwide political responsibility, we should be moving all the sooner to a policy of common responsibility in Europe; in the very Europe that right now is consolidating the foundations of coexistence for the future.

This is being heralded by common European policies - not only monetary, but also foreign, defence and security policies - the European human rights charter, and perhaps a future European constitution.

It is also heralded by the efforts to set up crisis management, which would prevent external or internal crises of countries in the region spilling over into armed conflict and aggression that might threaten the common peace, security and prosperity.

A global policy of common responsibility requires not only that we prevent the actions of others that harm the community, but also, and most importantly, that we refrain from such actions.

In the open, multipolar world where Eurocentrism is no more, Europe can be one of the standard-bearers of civilised development only if it is internally globalised, only if all of its parts are integrated within it, and if no one is excluded from the common future or marginalised.

In the ruins of the Berlin Wall, however, traces of new divisions are appearing in Europe.

In real life, several Europes exist.

Here we have the countries of the European Union and members of Nato, which are developing on the basis of the long European democratic tradition, on respect for human rights and the prospects of a new economic upswing, complete with a common European currency.

This grouping also includes some small countries that have experienced major developments within the EU and have preserved their special features.

The second Europe is one of countries that are negotiating with the European Union: countries, therefore, that are in the first or second-class waiting rooms for the European train.

The third Europe is made up of the countries of Eastern and South-Eastern Europe (Ukraine, Croatia, Bosnia-Herzegovina, Albania, Macedonia and Moldova), which have not yet reached the station, although they wish to do so.

Some of them will not get there without help.

There also exists a group of countries that, for the moment, do not wish to join the EU.

They would prefer to toy with the project of a new ideological division of Europe.

We may call this the fourth Europe.

Serbia, poised to tip the scales of stability in South-Eastern Europe, has been thrust into that fourth Europe by its aggressive national political elite, which has, from time to time, been supported by the nationalist ambitions of political elites from other Balkan nations.

As it decides on the lasting foundations of peace and also, following the horrors of war in the Balkans, on the future of Kosovo and Montenegro, European unity again faces a great test.

The possibility of bloody military clashes is still real.

This unity will be all the more vital when Serbia needs to be helped in the process of democratic change, when it will be faced with the truth and with its own responsibility.

This change will open up the field of democratic, plural politics and efforts to bring the European value system back into the consciousness of the Serbian people.

It will then be necessary for Serbia - and for other Balkan countries, too - to be presented with the challenging but realistic prospect of entry into European integration; and presented to each country on the same conditions, without special favours, but for this reason requiring all the more assistance.

None of these 'Europes' is immune from political or cultural diversions, which might distort their democratic image, not even the first Europe.

I have in mind the crude forms of xenophobia and hatred of foreigners, resistance to free movement of labour, and anti-Semitism, all of which are part of today' s political populism.

This puts pressure on fundamental values, and threatens coexistence and our common future.

Insensitivity to these phenomena would create new barriers between us.

We are reminded of this by the experience we carry with us.

I believe that the reservations of certain European countries towards the position of the Austrian Freedom Party are motivated by this experience and that this response will be consistent, irrespective of who might be affected by it.

Alongside all the old divisions, new ones are emerging, and they are even more radically afflicting Europe, for the information society of today' s world is presenting challenges to every facet of our lives.

There are ever increasing signs of the emergence of two classes in society.

The world is beginning to divide in a new way.

On the one hand, there are the unemployed and those who, through inadequate knowledge, have no access to modern information technology.

They are threatened with social exclusion, stagnation and marginalisation.

On the other hand, there are those who have the necessary education and are therefore guaranteed a future.

This is a new phenomenon, which was identified recently at the EU Conference in Lisbon on social cohesion.

It is clear that, today, everyone in Europe is faced with the same problems, and we are all responding to them.

Of course, we are not responding in entirely the same way.

Nevertheless, it is essential that in seeking answers we all proceed from the same value system.

The common cornerstones of values for coexistence have been established.

Now everyone must be afforded the chance to live in accordance with those values.

Decisive importance in this may probably be ascribed to the new feeling of commitment to Europe, which I understand as a Europe-wide system of human ties, cooperation, solidarity, respect and other values.

This does not simply involve the free flow of ideas, labour, goods and capital, but also values such as respect for diversity, tolerance, equality before the law of the 'citizens of Europe' , irrespective of their national, ethnic and cultural affiliation or outlook.

This will enable a high level of identification with the same values across Europe, which, in turn, may represent the basic connective tissue of Europe.

This frame of mind would be the best guarantee that intolerance and enmity remain a marginal phenomenon.

At the same time, it would mean that in no European country could those in power dare, in the name of sovereignty or the principle of non-interference in internal affairs, to systematically stifle or limit either individual or collective human rights.

Such an event would demand common action, without wavering or compromise.

The NATO intervention in Kosovo is perhaps the first step in this direction.

The value of fundamental human rights was placed above the value of classic state sovereignty.

The systematic mass violation of human rights should henceforth not simply be the internal affair of an individual country.

It is becoming a subject of responsibility for the international community.

Whether this marks the beginning of a new chapter in international relations and international law, only time will tell.

Europe, and in particular the EU, should not be in two minds about this.

The real path of globalisation for Europe is the enlargement of the European Union to cover all European countries.

This is a challenging enterprise, for a period of enlargement of the European Union is now beginning to include countries that have a different political 'pedigree' from the current members.

Now it is the turn of countries that, in the great division of the world, belonged to the former ideological East of Europe.

It is the turn of countries that, because of this, have lagged behind in their economic development.

Yet the fact is that only this enlargement will mean the actual integration and globalisation of Europe, and will mean for the European East and West an end to the past and for both the beginning of a global European future.

For those countries, like Slovenia, that were forcibly removed by the bloc system to a different culture, inclusion in European integration would also represent proof that they had finally returned to their western civilisation.

In any case, we should not forget that these countries, including Slovenia, have shown that in a relatively short time they have been able to adopt the rules that have taken a relatively long time to become established in the EU and in the European West.

The great efforts invested in reforms may serve as a guarantee that EU enlargement will be beneficial, both for the current members and for those that wish to become members.

Holding back this enlargement would indicate that Europe has still not buried the past, that it has not learned sufficiently from history, and that globalisation is not yet its internal requirement.

It would also indicate that Europe is abandoning its influence and presence in the world.

Alongside this new qualitative step forward, doubts are emerging among the members of the EU.

They are moving from the entirely known to the not entirely known.

The decision on enlargement carries with it entirely new risks; and there must be a degree of understanding for the dilemma facing the EU.

I am thinking primarily of the implementation of serious internal, institutional and substantive reforms in the EU, of its readiness to accept new members and of postponement of the date of enlargement.

Could it be perhaps that once again the special interests of individual Member States are rising to the surface? Does changing the view on successive acceptance of new countries, as soon as they are ready to be accepted, into a view on group acceptance of candidates in a first and second round, not mean a renewed shifting of enlargement towards the end of this first decade?

Dilemmas, doubts and uncertainties are also emerging among the candidate countries.

The impression is growing of a 'moving target' , which is shifting and dampening the enthusiasm of the better prepared candidates with the feeling that they will have to wait for the less-prepared candidates.

Clarity and transparency of these views would, of course, have an encouraging effect, and it would be especially useful if everyone could stop trying to offer each other excuses.

The EU should not use the problems among the candidate countries as an excuse to delay its own reforms, while the candidate countries should not use the difficulties of EU internal reforms as an excuse for putting off the reforms they need for full membership.

Such excuses would slow down the prospects of the rise of the future Europe, and making enlargement conditional upon bilateral demands and the interests of individual countries would have no less an effect.

This includes conditions that go far back into history and attempt to revise it, particularly the history of the Second World War.

Such demands are appearing from the position of power held by those that are in the European Union, against the powerlessness of those that are only just exercising the right to acceptance into the European Union.

At this point I would like to recall my address of November 1995 to the Committee on Foreign Policy, Security and Defence of your Parliament in its previous composition.

At that time, I argued against the discriminatory treatment of Slovenia, for the then Italian Government was preventing us, through its power of veto, from signing the association agreement, and was setting as a condition the resolving of what were for Italy issues in dispute deriving from the border treaties between Italy and the former Yugoslavia.

With its back to the wall, Slovenia signed the so-called 'Spanish compromise' .

I do not mention this episode to resurrect memories, but rather because in the current negotiations there have also appeared tendencies to raise purportedly justified interests in relation to Slovenia to the level of an EU demand.

I am thinking of the demand for restitution of property to those from whom it was appropriated following the Second World War as part of the punishing of collaboration with the Nazi and Fascist occupation regime.

In the then Yugoslavia, Slovenia did nothing that was not done in the spirit of the Potsdam resolutions by the Allies, with whom the Slovenes fought together against Fascism and Nazism.

This time, Slovenia does not wish to accept this kind of imposition of conditions, and expects understanding and sympathy from the European Union.

I believe that individual bilateral issues should not, in any event, be allowed to become a reason for placing conditions on acceptance as a full member of the EU; nor should they be allowed to gain the pragmatic support of EU members, for the sake of clear and open foundations in European integration and in its future.

For many centuries we lived in a multinational political community, in the Austro-Hungarian Empire and in two Yugoslavias.

We felt all the anguish of non-respect for national identity, of pressures towards our national identity being wiped out and of the fatal consequences of inequality in society and before the law.

The worst thing of all was the aggression during the time of the Nazi and Fascist occupation.

Our right to existence as a nation was taken away.

For this reason we value highly the efforts of those carrying forward the project of a common European home, founded on the concept of open autonomy of national and other entities of society.

Life in diversity is the key to success for European association, and Slovenia has tied its future to this.

Our historical experiences and the future of our citizens dictate that we cannot reconcile ourselves either to voluntary or forced isolation from Euro-Atlantic institutions.

Slovenia wishes to be a part of them, and is prepared to contribute what it can to the common life of European nations, but is not prepared to pay an inequitable price for it.

Slovenia will be ready for accession by the end of 2002, and believes that it will then be welcome in the club of EU Member States.

We are also pleased that, in Helsinki, the Member States of the EU committed themselves to enlargement by the same date for those candidate countries best prepared.

In order for the current goals to be achieved, negotiations should be concluded next year.

We are convinced that the current progress in negotiations should make this possible.

I would like finally to stress that I do not see globalisation and European integration as unification.

The positive effects of these processes are interdependent on the simultaneously establishing freedom of individuation and fragmentation.

This is not just the freedom and autonomy of the individual, but also the freedom of social groups to express ethnic, cultural, religious, political and spiritual affiliations and convictions.

These freedoms have a special meaning in people' s lives, and through them people express their bond with specific values.

Only respect for such freedoms can be the foundation of European coexistence.

This involves establishing the principle of 'unity in diversity' .

If we do not succeed in finding in this new millennium the foundations of coexistence, which cannot simply be a negation of the past, but also an active acceptance of the future, including the formulation of a universal European policy of common responsibility in an open European Union, Europe will direct its destiny back into the past instead of into the future.

In the first decade of the new century and millennium, democratic Europe is also facing new trials.

My firm conviction is that united Europeans could be more than a match for these trials.

Thank you, Mr President, for addressing us in forceful, committed and frank terms.

You mentioned the fiftieth anniversary of the declaration by Robert Schuman, which Parliament has indeed celebrated formally.

I noticed, Mr President, that you spoke of "our common day of celebration." I must tell you, we particularly appreciated this.

Thank you, too, for mentioning the visit I made to Ljubljana a few weeks ago.

This was part of the ninth meeting of the Presidents of the European Parliament and the presidents of candidate countries, a tradition initiated several years ago by my predecessors, Enrique Barón Crespo, Klaus Hänsch and José Maria Gil Robles.

During this visit, I was most honoured to be given the opportunity to address the Chamber of the Slovene Parliament and I must say that, together with Mr Podestá, the Vice-President responsible for enlargement, Mr Brok, chairman of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy, and Mr Ebner, president of the delegation, we were very impressed by the considerable progress achieved by your country on the path to accession.

Let me, finally, tell you that Parliament would, I feel, very broadly agree with the views you have expressed.

In the goals you mentioned, you spoke of wishing to enter a house that was solid, strong and united, and I think I am safe in saying that that is the wish of the majority in this House.

You also mentioned unity in diversity.

I should like to point out, in that connection, that, a few weeks ago, 80 000 young people from the countries of the European Union took part in a competition to find a motto for Europe, and the one which was adopted in the end by the grand jury was "Unity in diversity" .

I have to confess that it is not very snappy, but it is more interesting than it seems because it does appear to respond to a very deep-seated feeling shared by many of the citizens of our countries.

Finally, Mr President, you mentioned the values you hold dear, and which form the basis of European integration.

You also mentioned the hope that we would not lose sight of social solidarity in the context of globalisation.

Once again, I think your views are in total accord with the objectives of the European Parliament.

I wish you and also the Slovene authorities participating in the negotiations the very best of luck.

We sincerely hope that these negotiations will come to a successful conclusion within the expected time limits.

We wish you good luck, Mr President, and we thank you once again for coming here today and addressing us.

(The formal sitting was closed at 12.30 p.m.)

Madam President, I wholeheartedly support Mr Buttiglione' s speech and, on behalf of the Forza Italia delegation of which I am head in the European People' s Party, I cannot forget the suffering of the Italian people in the former Yugoslavia at the end and during the immediate aftermath of the Second World War.

A genuine ethnic cleansing operation took place and disputes still remain which have not been resolved. Some Italian citizens are still waiting for their rights to be respected.

We are on extremely good terms with Slovenia, but we cannot forget past events or allow them to be forgotten.

The Europe which is just emerging, our common home which we are building together, cannot disregard the past.

We cannot create a Europe which does not condemn the atrocities perpetrated by Communism and Nazism.

Therefore, Madam President, in addition to calling upon you to make authoritative representations to the Slovenian Government, I also invite all the Members of Parliament to sign the declaration calling for the institution of a day dedicated to the Shoah, to the holocaust, to be observed throughout the European Union.

Madam President, we know President Kuçan and we are aware of his regard for Europe and the good relations which have been established between Italy and Slovenia.

We do not feel there is cause for concern but we would certainly like the matter to be clarified, and I would like to say that we regard the Spanish compromise managed by Mr Solana as non-negotiable.

Clearly, there is no question mark over any of this, and, therefore, I also consider that it would be appropriate for you to obtain clarification of the issue.

We entrust the matter to your wisdom and authority.

I propose to the three speakers that I write to Mr Kuçan to inform him very respectfully of your remarks. I should probably also give him a very precise account of your interventions.

I believe that these reflect the feelings of a large part of this House. Thank you for trusting me to inform Mr Kuçan of this situation as precisely and clearly as possible.

I have two statements to make.

You should already have received the first one by e-mail. This concerns the practical problems encountered on some of Parliament' s premises.

The Quaestors acted quickly to resolve this situation in the best way possible.

They commissioned air analyses from the German company, Dekra, which identified certain failures which we have remedied as quickly as possible.

I thank the Quaestors, and particularly the President of the College, Mr Poos, for their prompt action.

I myself immediately wrote to the Strasbourg authorities and the social services so that all the relevant authorities were informed.

You should therefore have received this statement by e-mail.

My second statement concerns the information sent to me by the French Government regarding the receipt of a decree withdrawing the mandate of Mr Le Pen.

You will remember that I informed the House at the time that I would ask the Legal Affairs Committee, in accordance with our Rules of Procedure, to give an opinion on this issue.

This committee has, on several occasions, examined all the aspects, particularly the legal ones, of this issue.

I thank Mrs Palacio, the committee' s chairperson, and the committee members for their efforts.

The discussions were extremely thorough and it was only yesterday, at 8 p.m., that I received Mrs Palacio' s letter informing me of the committee' s opinion on this issue.

So that there is no room for error or misinterpretation, I would prefer to read you the letter.

'Madam President, during its meeting of 16 May 2000, the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market re-examined the situation of Mr Le Pen.

The committee is aware that the decree of the Prime Minister of the French Republic, of which Mr Le Pen was notified on 5 April 2000, and which was published in the Official Journal of the French Republic on 22 April 2000, has become enforceable.

However, the committee has also noted, as mentioned in the letter notifying Mr Le Pen of the decree, that the latter has the option of appealing to the French Council of State. This appeal may be accompanied by a request to suspend the enforcement of the decree.

In view of the decision taken the day before not to recommend at present that Parliament officially take note of the decree regarding Mr Le Pen, the committee has examined the possible responses.

The case of Mr Tapie was mentioned as a precedent to be followed in support of this decision.

The result is that the European Parliament should officially take note of the decree withdrawing Mr Le Pen' s mandate only after expiry of the deadline for appealing to the French Council of State or, if applicable, after a decision by the latter' .

These are the contents of the letter sent to me yesterday evening by Mrs Palacio on behalf of the Legal Affairs Committee. Once again, I thank her.

I intend to abide by the opinion of the Legal Affairs Committee.

Madam President, I am taking the floor to request that Parliament express its opinion in accordance with Rule 7(4) of the Rules of Procedure.

If you will allow me, I will justify my proposal.

Madam President, Rule 7(4) of the Rules of Procedure lays down that the President may ask the competent committee for its opinion and that Parliament may express its opinion on the basis of that proposal.

I would ask Parliament to express its view, and I do so with all due respect for the Committee on Legal Affairs and the internal Market, which has held a full debate on this issue, because I believe that there are two basic elements here.

One of them is respect for parliamentary rules and the Treaties.

Monday' s letter from the chairperson of the Legal Affairs Committee - which is the one I know, because I have just been made aware of it - cited Article 12(2) of the 1976 Act concerning the election of representatives of the European Parliament, which reads as follows: "Where a seat falls vacant pursuant to national provisions in force in a Member State, the latter shall inform the European Parliament, which shall take note of the fact" .

This means, firstly, that a Member State, which is a constitutional state, like France, has taken decisions in accordance with a legal judgement and the executive...

(The President cut the speaker off)

I am going to suspend the sitting for a few moments as it seems that one of our colleagues is feeling ill.

(The sitting was suspended at 10.20 a.m. and resumed at 10.40 a.m.)

Ladies and gentlemen, Mr Staes has just been taken ill.

Apparently it does not seem to be a heart problem and is therefore hopefully not too serious but an ECG is going to be carried out straightaway.

I can therefore reassure you, relatively speaking, about his state of health.

I thank the two Members who are doctors for taking immediate action and for giving me this information.

I must also say that this unfortunate incident has regrettably shown the length of time which it takes for the medical services to arrive.

This sort of thing could happen to any of us so we definitely need to do something.

I am going to give the floor to Mrs Banotti who wishes to speak straightaway so that the Quaestors can take steps to ensure that the facilities are exactly as they should be.

Madam President, we have all been deeply distressed by the illness of our colleague.

I am immensely relieved that he appears not to be as ill as he appeared at the beginning. I am a nurse which is why I went up to see if I could give assistance.

We have to recognise that, particularly when the weather gets as hot as it did this week, colleagues' health is under a great deal of stress.

It is unfortunate that it took a considerable time to get the stretcher to take Mr Staes out of the Chamber.

I would propose on behalf of colleagues that we have immediate resuscitation equipment here in the Chamber in case such a distressing event occurs again.

I am very glad that he is not as ill as he looked, but we must have resuscitative equipment in the House, given not only the conditions but some of our ages and I include myself in that.

Many colleagues are finding it particularly difficult this week in the heat.

I believe there are no age limits for this type of illness.

Madam President, together with the other MEPs who were present during the moments after our colleague fell ill, I must say in all fairness that the time that passed between the incident occurring and the arrival of the doctor would be classed as admirable for any of the world' s institutions.

And when the official doctor, who came equipped with all the appropriate resuscitation equipment - and in this respect I agree with my colleague - ordered the stretcher, the stretcher arrived.

I am very satisfied with the time that was taken and the action of Parliament' s medical services.

Madam President, maybe at long last we will decide that the Medical Services should not be placed in the basement.

They would prefer to be on the same floor as the plenary session and maybe we could actually look into that.

Ladies and gentlemen, we trust that the Quaestors will look into the matter.

Madam President, I very much hope that Mr Staes will get well soon, but I believe that we should also remind and ask the media to inform our co-citizens that our life is not a bed of roses, and that coming and going like nomads is not the best thing for our health.

However, we have all made a free choice.

I will return to the issue we were discussing: my Group' s request for this House to express its opinion in accordance with the regulations.

I was reading Article 12(2) of the Act of 1976, which is the legal basis cited by the chairperson of the Legal Affairs Committee in her letter of Monday.

This paragraph says: "Where a seat falls vacant pursuant to national provisions in force in a Member State, the latter shall inform the European Parliament, which shall take note of the fact" .

There has been a legal judgement, a government decree, which has been communicated to us and I believe it falls to the European Parliament to take note of it in accordance with the Treaties and with parliamentary law.

I have heard - because I do not have first-hand knowledge of the letter - that precedents are cited.

There certainly are precedents and my Group believes they should be respected.

However, in this case, we should not cite the precedent of Mr Tapie for two reasons: firstly, he was ineligible for reasons of bankruptcy, and, secondly - and this is important - he had used his right to appeal.

Here we have a case of ineligibility for one year and the right to appeal, recognised in the French decree, has not been used.

I do not wish to enter into a debate on French law, since I have no knowledge of it.

I believe that, in accordance with the Treaties and our Rules, Parliament must take note of the decision of the French State.

This is the correct procedure and I think that, although I was not present in the Committee on Legal Affairs, the proposal does not reflect it.

In any event, I believe that this proposal should not be ratified by the European Parliament, I am going to request that it be put to the vote and I would like to say that my Group will vote against it.

Madam President, I am speaking as coordinator for the Socialist Group in the European Parliament' s Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market.

I was very surprised by the letter which you have just read from the chairperson of the Legal Affairs Committee.

Yesterday, I received a letter from the chairperson, which faithfully reflected what had happened in the Legal Affairs Committee: following a discussion, it was decided not to recommend that Parliament take note, leaving the issue on the table for further discussion.

The letter which you have read reflects the personal motives which the chairperson and perhaps other MEPs put forward, but which does not reflect the point of view of the Legal Affairs Committee.

Specifically, the Socialist Group' s position was that, in view of the Act of 1976, all this Parliament could do is what Mr Barón just said, that is to say, take note (prendre acte) of the decision of the French Government, with no other condition.

The possibility of giving an explanation was raised, and I argued that that would mean a new vote.

No new vote took place and therefore - I repeat - the views expressed in the letter which you have just read reflect Mrs Palacio' s personal position and not the position of the Legal Affairs Committee.

Madam President, firstly I would like to say that, in any event, we are all aware that we are facing a situation in which we have to find our way with few specific points of reference and therefore, we must resort to analogy, precedent, common sense and, in general terms, the general principles of the law.

This is because in our statutory law, in our Rules of Procedure, there is no explicit mention of how to proceed in a situation such as this.

Secondly, I wish to point out that there is doubtless confusion here.

Madam President, you have consulted the Legal Affairs Committee on the basis of a purely formal decision.

As on other occasions, such as, for example, when the Legal Affairs Committee examines whether or not to lodge an appeal in the Court of Justice, we are talking about a purely technical assessment by an internal body of Parliament, which makes a recommendation to the President, the external body of Parliament, who is expected to take the decision.

I respect what Mr Barón Crespo says.

His views were discussed and examined in depth by the Legal Affairs Committee.

Allow me to refer to what was said in this committee.

Firstly, Mr Barón says that there is no similarity with the Tapie case because the ineligibility in that case stemmed from a bankruptcy and in this case it stems from a criminal conviction.

I do not personally share that view, and I believe that, according to the relevant law, there are reasons not to share it, because, in any event, we are talking about two sentences, both from French courts and both leading to ineligibility.

It makes no sense now to look into the reason for the sentence.

The fact that it involves ineligibility is what concerns us.

Mr Barón' s second argument concerning the difference between the cases related to the fact that Mr Le Pen has not lodged an appeal and that Mr Tapie had.

I do not share this view either, and nor did the majority of the Legal Affairs Committee, because Mr Le Pen is still within the time limit for lodging an appeal.

We therefore cannot go against something, to which he is entitled under French law: to lodge an appeal within a certain time limit.

Please allow me now to refute Mr Medina' s statement on his interpretation of the matter.

I would like to do this calmly, although I consider it to be absolutely unjustified and to warrant a more forceful response.

However, in my capacity as chairperson, I must point out that the two letters are complementary.

In the first letter, Madam President, you were informed that the Legal Affairs Committee had taken a decision not to take note of the judgement for the moment, bearing in mind that it is not final. It is enforceable but not final.

In the second paragraph it said: "tomorrow we will continue to discuss this issue" .

The second letter refers to what happened at the second meeting and all the members of the Legal Affairs Committee know that that was how I presented it.

In no way was there any intention to hold a vote, but simply a discussion. I personally, as rapporteur, was going to propose a basis for discussion.

There was therefore no place for a vote on the issue and I had stated that on the previous day.

The vote had already taken place in the Legal Affairs Committee.

Madam President, I did inform you of what happened in that debate and why it did not continue, and it did not do so basically because there was insistence on the issue of the Tapie case.

Clearly, the Legal Affairs Committee can vote on anything, but since it was not laid down and since it was dealing with such an important and serious issue which did not appear in the agenda, it did not seem to me to be reasonable to hold a vote if we were taking a route which all the speakers - and this is recorded in the Minutes - for one reason or another, rejected.

Furthermore, the Minutes also show that I said that a committee chairperson rarely obtained such a degree of unanimity with regard to a proposal.

I say this in order to refute these statements.

I would now like to make a comment in relation to the Rules of Procedure.

Madam President, Rule 7(4) is being cited.

That paragraph - in the event that we had to resort to it, which I do not believe to be the case, and I will explain why - states that Parliament may express its opinion on a proposal.

Madam President, there is no proposal to the plenary here.

I believe that, in order to vote honestly, on an issue as delicate as this, if Parliament has to vote, a report should be produced in accordance with the rules, so that everybody may vote as they see fit, and not be influenced by allegations from one side or the other, bearing in mind that, in actual fact, the majority of MEPs are not aware of the background to this issue.

Therefore, if the President wishes to take this route, a report by the Legal Affairs Committee is absolutely essential and it would be irregular not to proceed in that way,...

... for Parliament to express its opinion on an issue for which there is no written document or anything whatsoever, and which requires legal consideration at the highest level.

It is absolutely irregular and contrary to the Rule that has been cited...

... because, Madam President, a majority in the Legal Affairs Committee considered, on purely legal bases, that we could not take note of this loss of MEP status.

Madam President, in my opinion, furthermore, this article is not applicable, and I will tell you why: Parliament is asked to take note. It does not have the option of making a political assessment.

It is in the nature of all decisions in plenary that they be taken from a political point of view. In this case we are talking about a purely formal legal assessment.

Madam President, I believe that it falls to the President to take this decision, and you may consult the Rules of Procedure, which states that you must consult the Legal Affairs Committee.

An analysis could be made of the reasons why the Legal Affairs Committee should be consulted, as the internal advisory body in this case. I am prepared to make this analysis, because I have done so before.

Madam President, you can consult any other internal body and, in particular ...

(The President cut the speaker off)

... the Conference of Group Chairmen. However, the House cannot consider this proposal in these circumstances.

(Protests and the President cut the speaker off)

Madam President, as one political group chairman has spoken, as is his right of course, I would also like to briefly make our Group' s position clear.

The person in question holds political views most of which I find loathsome.

But there are legal systems in the European Union and I would always defend the rights of all Members of the European Parliament under those legal systems.

If legal proceedings are being taken against a Member of this House in a Member State, then we should await the outcome of those proceedings before we can make a final decision here.

Mr Hänsch, if my information is correct, and I have not had a chance to talk to you about this, but I say this with all due respect to our former President, Klaus Hänsch, then our former President specifically made the same point in relation to the Tapie case, that is to say that we should await the outcome of the appeal procedure before we reach a decision here.

What was right then cannot be wrong now.

We must respect the rights of every individual Member of this House, whatever his political views are.

My Group will always argue for that, even if the Members involved belong to other groups.

We will defend these rights with equal vigour, because they are our common rights.

If we violate the law, we can say goodbye to the European Union.

That is why we respect and defend the law - no matter who it applies to.

Mr President, the representatives of our group in the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market have familiarised themselves thoroughly with this matter, and I too represent our group in this Committee.

We are fully aware of the political sensitivity of this issue.

We do not, however, want this issue to be used against us for political purposes.

Supported by a majority, our Group concluded that the opinion of the majority of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market was justified.

We must make it clear, however, that if there is to be a vote in the part-session on this matter, i.e. on whether the mandate of Mr Le Pen should be terminated, the majority of the French delegation in our Group will vote in favour of this termination.

I speak as the coordinator of the ELDR Group on the Legal Affairs Committee.

The House should realise, from the fact that this matter has occupied our Committee for a period of three very long and exhaustive meetings, that it was felt to be a very complex and difficult issue to deal with.

I for one would feel it wrong for this House to try to look at this matter in a hurry, which seems to be the proposal being put forward by Mr Barón Crespo.

This is a case for absolute objectivity and attention to the rules.

As I understand the rule in question, which, Madame President, you are carefully trying to construe, there is at the moment an opinion before you from the Legal Affairs Committee but there is not a proposal as such.

The rule talks about Parliament having a right to give a view on a proposal, but it seems that you have merely an opinion, not a proposal.

If we were to take a view as a full Parliament, then we should have something more in front of us and a great deal more time and careful consideration before we enter into such a hasty vote on an issue such as this.

Ladies and gentlemen, I have received many requests to speak.

We absolutely must find the best solution.

I will read to you the letter that Mr Hänsch sent to Mr Hervé de Charrette, the then French Foreign Minister, at the time of the Tapie affair.

The most important paragraph states that: "Due to the irreversible nature of the withdrawal of the mandate, it seems to me appropriate to wait for the Council of State to rule on this appeal.

It appears that the Council of State' s decision on the stay of execution will be taken imminently" .

As you can see, and we cannot get into a discussion on this, I too looked at what my predecessors did in similar situations because case law does, rightfully, exist.

We are now in a difficult position.

I propose that we decide whether or not we want the Legal Affairs Committee to draw up a genuine proposal, as some of you seem to think that the letter written to me by Mrs Palacio is not a proposal within the terms of the Rules of Procedure.

Personally, I must abide by the Rules of Procedure which state that: "On a proposal from that committee, Parliament may adopt a position on the matter" .

If Parliament, therefore, wants a genuine proposal, we will ask the Legal Affairs Committee to draw up this proposal on which we can calmly vote, not at midday, but a little later perhaps.

I will therefore immediately put the two possible solutions to the vote.

The first is that we keep to the current position which is to abide by the terms of Mrs Palacio' s letter and await the outcome of any appeal lodged with the Council of State by the Member in question, before officially noting the withdrawal or otherwise of the mandate. The second solution is that the plenary asks the Legal Affairs Committee to draw up a genuine proposal on which Parliament will adopt a position in accordance with Rule 7(4).

Madam President, I am sorry I need to ask to speak again, but we cannot vote on anything at all here today, because we have clear and proper procedures.

If we refer a matter to a committee, then we must have a basis for doing so, that is to say we need a document defining that referral.

We do not have such a document.

That is why I urge you not to hold a vote on this matter now in any way whatsoever.

Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, I appeal to Mr Barón Crespo and the Socialist Group.

We have reached an impasse. I fully understand that you want Mr Le Pen to lose his mandate.

Fortunately, however, this issue does not depend on our political desires but on the law and on the fact that, at the moment, we are faced with a legal situation which goes against what you are proposing and which is forcing us into a stalemate.

Either this is a legal proposal from the committee and we can vote on this basis or this is not a legal proposal, in which case you are asking for one to be drawn up.

If you want a vote as an indication of our position, that is entirely up to you, but it would be wise to reject this as I believe there is a contradiction.

I do not often agree with Mrs Garaud but in this case she is right.

There is a contradiction in French law which states that a decision is not final and not suspensive.

Understand that if you can, but it is up to the French Parliament to reform this law.

In our opinion - and on this point, Mr Wurtz, I cannot agree with you - the French State, the Italian State and the German State are sovereign.

The European Parliament is also sovereign and can adopt a position contrary to a state decision.

This is my conception of Europe.

In the current situation, I would simply ask you to say that we will wait and press for a decision by the Council of State as to whether or not Mr Le Pen' s request is suspensive.

This would not be a decision on the substance, even though it is purely a legal matter, but on the form.

If the Council of State decides today that its decision is not suspensive, the European Parliament can, within 48 hours, take the necessary decision.

I would therefore ask you to withdraw your request for a vote so that we do not reach a total impasse.

I see that Mr Barón Crespo is applauding Mr Hänsch.

I therefore assume that he agrees with Mr Cohn­Bendit and will withdraw his request as this is not a genuine proposal from the Legal Affairs Committee.

This is the best solution for everyone.

The next item is the report (A5-0136/2000) by Mrs Buitenweg, on behalf of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, on the proposal for a Council directive implementing the principle of equal treatment between persons irrespective of racial or ethnic origin [COM(1999) 0566 - C5-0067/2000 - 1999/0253(CNS)].

Madam President, the agenda features an extremely important report by Mrs Buitenweg, yet, with all due respect, we are going through it rather quickly.

Especially given that we only voted on her report this week in the parliamentary committee, we have since had very little time to work on amendments for the plenary.

But to make matters worse, I have to say that, in this case, Rule 115 applies, which states that, except in the cases of urgency referred to in Rules 50 and 112, a debate and vote shall not be opened on a text unless it was distributed at least 24 hours previously.

The latter, Madam President, was unfortunately not the case.

As I understand, the French version was still not available this morning.

I suggest postponing the debate and vote on this extremely important report to the next part-session.

Madam President, on a point of order.

I wish to make three brief points.

The first concerns the point of procedure addressed by Mr Oostlander, namely that various colleagues felt, because of the sensitivity of the issue in hand, that they should like to have in their own language, as is their right, the text of the report and all the amendments to it.

This matter was signalled clearly at the Conference of Presidents last week - on more than one occasion, I understand.

I myself was absent, but I have had this confirmed to me.

In that case, when the sensitivity of the availability of documents was clearly signalled, why was it not prioritised by the services in such a way as to avoid this?

Given the sensitivity, the Bureau, the House and the Conference of Presidents should be given a detailed account of this breakdown in the system.

My second point is that Mr Oostlander is perfectly within his rights to say that, under Rule 115, proceeding with the debate or the vote can be questioned as the documentation was not available 24 hours in advance.

He is perfectly correct to insist on the application of that rule, if he should so wish.

It is my understanding that all the documents and amendments in all languages were finally available about 3 p.m. yesterday.

I should like to have that confirmed.

If that is true, I should then like to suggest that we change our order of business for today and, respecting the 24-hour deadline, I would ask the rapporteur, Mrs Buitenweg, to introduce her report at 3 p.m., followed by a debate, urgencies and then the vote, which would fully respect the 24-hour deadline.

There is one point that, to many of us, is the issue of substance in this report.

We have under the Treaties the power now to bring in new anti-discrimination legislation.

Of all the areas of political sensitivity in contemporary Europe, that dealing with racism and xenophobia should be given the highest priority in this House.

The Portuguese Presidency will organise a Social Affairs Council which we can engage with if we deliver a view.

I appeal to the House to make creative use of the possibility open to us, in setting our agenda, to recognise this substantive political requirement and to facilitate a debate at 3 p.m. and a vote at 6 p.m. or thereafter this evening.

Before giving the floor to the rapporteur, Mrs Buitenweg, I can tell you that the report was available in all languages yesterday afternoon and that the amendments have only just become available.

It is quite clear that we are not within the time limit established in Rule 115.

Madam President, I am delighted with Mr Cox' s proposal and I think that it is also a viable compromise.

I regret that the Group of the European People' s Party (Christian Democrats) and European Democrats have quoted Rule 115, because the last version of the text, which was the French one, was actually issued at 1.02 a.m.

It is now 23.5 hours later.

Maybe they need this last half hour to prepare for their debate, but it does seem that they seized on this as a rather lame excuse.

However, I am in favour of the compromise of starting this debate at 3.00 p.m., and I also hope that we will be able to finish it this afternoon.

I would like to point out once more that it is indeed extremely important to finish it during this sitting because, otherwise, we will lose all authority which we can still exercise in the Social Affairs Council, to be held on 5 and 6 June and, in that way, the report' s significance will be seriously undermined.

Mr Poettering, the law affecting any given issue is subject to interpretation.

I believe that the position adopted by Mr Cox - who formed a strategic majority with you in order to have Mrs Fontaine elected - is a compromise that makes it possible for everyone here to vote for a report on racism with their head held high.

Opinions may be divided about Austria, but when it comes to making it clear what our position is on racism in Europe, we should not get bogged down in a formal debate as we did just now, we should make it plain that we are clear-thinking people.

So I appeal to you to accept Mr Cox' s compromise so we can proceed with the debate with our heads held high.

The debate on this dossier in the committee I have the honour to chair has been an excellent example of cooperation between different committees in Parliament and indeed of cooperation between Parliament, the Commission and the Council presidency.

When it was voted in committee on Monday night, the text and all 200 amendments were available in all languages.

I would like to repeat Mr Cox' s call and ask if you will give this House an assurance that there will be an inquiry into why the final text was not available in French until yesterday afternoon, more than 40 hours after it was adopted in committee.

The fact is that the debate on this directive has been exemplary - it has been a credit to this Parliament and any attempt to delay that debate or to delay a vote would be a sordid political move for reasons of party political advantage.

Madam President, on behalf of my Group, I would like to insist on Rule 115 and it is essential that it is checked how and when the translations were provided.

However, in line with Mr Cox, I deem it slightly inconvenient if, for that reason, this text will be debated on Friday morning, because this will surely cause a moral dilemma for a number of people.

Madam President, the proposal which I have made and I shall repeat is that we should consider holding the debate at 15.00 hrs followed by the urgency debate, followed by votes on the report, other reports that are completed in debate and urgencies this afternoon.

I am now looking to see whether the deadlines would be respected in this case.

I therefore put Mr Cox' s proposal, as accepted by the rapporteur, to the vote.

Madam President, yesterday my Group presented a request that all procedural questions related to this report should be subject to roll-call voting.

I would ask you to accept this request.

Mr President, just one specific question: when will the debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance start, given that it was quite definitely and firmly set for 3 to 5.30 p.m.?

At what time will it start?

I have a right to know.

Mr Posselt, considering the time necessary for the debate on Mrs Buitenweg' s report, the debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance will take place at approximately 4.30 p.m.

Mr President, Mrs Diamantopoulou, ladies and gentlemen, first of all, I would like to thank everyone who has worked on this report, that is to say, all collaborators, but also the people from the Committee on Women' s Rights and Equal Opportunities and the interpreters, who have worked very hard.

This report is also a reaction to the excellent communication by the Committee on new measures to fight trafficking in women.

By way of preparing for the report, the Committee on Women' s Rights and Equal Opportunities organised a public hearing which involved experts and the presence of a victim who came to give her story.

A delegation of this committee, together with Mrs Diamantopoulou, visited a shelter for victims of trafficking in people.

Moreover, the Ministries of Foreign Affairs of Member States and candidate countries received a questionnaire on how they tackle trafficking in women, the results of which will be made available to the European Commission.

The report primarily aims to fight trafficking in women, but also in children and men, that is to say in people in general.

Trafficking in children does exist, but they are used as adults.

Men, too, are victims of trafficking in people and are sexually abused.

In fact, the sex industry is not the only market on which the victims of such trafficking are sold.

In Belgium, 40 percent of the victims end up on the labour market, in the textile, hotel and catering and fruit-picking industries, bakeries and the construction industry, or as house staff or au-pair girls, obliged to work as slaves in degrading conditions.

Victims are also recruited for the marriage market, as well as to sports clubs and football clubs.

According to estimates by the United Nations and the International Organisation for Migration, the IOM, every year four million people throughout the world fall victim to trafficking, 500 000 of whom end up in Europe.

All the signs are there that the number of victims is rising and that the influx from Central and Eastern European countries has exceeded the existing stream from Africa, Latin America, the Caribbean and Asia.

In a report by the United Nations, it is stressed that trafficking in people is one of the fastest growing forms of organised crime.

The huge profits and relative safety for the perpetrators who generate this type of crime will undoubtedly have something to do with this.

The penalties for smuggling narcotics, for example, are far higher than those for trafficking in women.

Victims are often unable to speak out on account of the illegal situation they are in.

Since there are clear indications that these problems are developing within the framework of international networks, it is important that these problems are addressed and tackled at European level.

In order to tackle trafficking in people adequately, we first of all need a clear definition of trafficking in people.

Priority must also be given to the fight against organised networks which are not only involved in trafficking in people but which are also involved in all kinds of other criminal activity, such as the trade in narcotics, arms and such like.

I therefore applaud the new Community initiatives concerning money laundering where the income from trafficking in women plays a major role.

Various initiatives have already been taken at European level.

Efforts to increase public awareness have got off to a good start in the form of activities on the part of Interpol and Europol, initiatives in every individual Member State, Habitat projects, etc. However, the harmonisation of the different national legislations in this field and the ensuing discrepancies in methods of investigation and prosecution have to be tackled at European level as a matter of priority.

From a survey organised in connection with this report, it is quite clear that there are considerable discrepancies in this sphere between the Member States and between one candidate country and another.

Some countries which have strict legislation on prostitution do not even have any legislation at all on trafficking in people.

By introducing the STOP programme, Europe is striking while the iron is hot, and opportunities for collaboration have opened up.

Last year, the Council adopted the DAPHNE programme.

This is a new policy tool intended to prevent all kinds of violence - physical, sexual and psychological - against women and children.

It is encouraging that, in the first half of this year, the Commission wishes to submit detailed proposals for harmonising criminal legislation in the Member States on trafficking in people with a view to their sexual exploitation and, specifically, proposals for granting temporary residence permits to victims who are prepared to cooperate in the investigations which are necessary if legal action is to be taken against the traffickers.

Scanning the amendments, I have the impression that some people want to hijack this report, which is about victims of trafficking in people, to start a debate on prostitution.

In the Committee on Women' s Rights and Equal Opportunities, a clear decision was made to discuss trafficking in women, or forced prostitution, within the framework of this report.

A debate on whether or not to ban or legalise prostitution may be pressing, but cannot be held at this point in the interest of the victims of trafficking in people.

As I said, trafficking in people is not just about the problem of demand for prostitution.

Victims of trafficking in women also find it extremely difficult to re-integrate into their place of origin and even within their own families.

Once they have, as victims, worked in prostitution, they are labelled prostitutes for the rest of their lives or, as the saying goes, once a prostitute, always a prostitute.

The initiatives which have been taken are the first step towards a solution but the number of victims continues to grow.

A great deal therefore remains to be done.

We have submitted proposals on prevention, reception of victims and legislation.

A society faced with such a phenomenon has a moral duty towards the victims and must give a high priority to the fight against trafficking in people and to victim support.

. (FR) Mr President, this report is vitally important.

We are profoundly affected by the tragedy of trafficking in women which is a modern form of slavery.

Our priority must be to give aid and assistance to the victims.

We must fight to eliminate all the links in the chain, namely recruitment, transport, managers, middlemen and clients.

By holding this debate today in the European Parliament, we are helping the victims to regain their dignity and integrity.

Women and children are being traded like goods and doomed to prostitution.

Trafficking in women is an important type of trade for organised crime which regards human beings as goods to be bought and sold.

Misfortune, misery and the false promises of pimps are luring these young women into our countries. They are attracted by promises of employment and some even come in the hope of getting married.

They have no idea of the miserable conditions in which they will be exploited, beaten, tortured and threatened.

Over half of the victims are under the age of 25 and around 10% are between 15 and 18.

Even if these very young girls seem willing, because they are being threatened or are in love, we cannot, at any price, allow prostitution to continue freely when you see how these women are terrorised and traded.

This is why, in our opinion, we cannot use the term 'forced prostitution' in this report.

Trafficking in women involves terrible sexual exploitation.

We must help these victims to speak out and denounce their living conditions.

We must welcome and help them.

The pimps are very violent and victims must pay off large debts to cover the cost of their journeys and the various identity documents which they must acquire.

When they resist the pressure of traffickers and pimps, they are threatened either personally or through their families.

The traffickers belong to a Mafia-like criminal organisation and control several links in the network that has power over the victim.

There is no way out for victims and the very nature of the environment in which they work often reduces them to despair and drug addiction.

Some even go as far as committing suicide.

Fighting against trafficking in human beings is essential but it is better to prevent this.

It is therefore vital to establish a system of information and preventive education for both young people in the countries concerned and also clients who are often what we would call 'family men' .

We should not forget that trafficking has economic roots.

Inequalities and relationships of dependency between privileged and disadvantaged countries mean that it is still always the weakest in society, particularly the women, who pay the price.

We demand a coherent European policy which is why this report is so important.

Trafficking in women is a crime. Trafficking in human beings and sexual exploitation are unworthy of humanity.

Mr President, it has already been said.

We are touching upon an important topic here, namely that of people' s dignity.

As has been said, it is not just about trafficking in women, although that is the subject of the communication, but it extends to trafficking in people generally.

Men, girls and boys, are also involved.

It is a growing problem in the EU, too.

Trafficking in women appears to be financially lucrative.

Not only do women from Asian countries fall victim, but also more and more women from Central and Eastern European countries, including women from candidate countries.

They are lured under false pretences - through job advertisements, for example - into becoming hairdressers or into working in bars or as dancers, or else they are enticed via the lonely hearts columns.

Women are often easy prey, given the poor conditions they live under.

Trafficking in women is increasingly linked with international criminal organisations.

A great deal has been done, but still more needs to be done, especially when it comes to aligning different countries' legislation for the purposes of tracing and prosecution and when it comes to providing information to the police and courts.

This is why I welcome the European Commission' s initiative, as well as the specific proposals in the report, for example, with regard to the further harmonisation of legislation which may facilitate the tracing of victims and prosecution of offenders and make these activities more efficient; with regard to cooperation and coordination, especially during investigations, at police stations and in the courts; and also specifically with regard to the reception and protection of victims.

I hope it will be possible to adopt the amendment on non-governmental organisations, tabled by our group and amended in consultation with the Greens.

Whenever new needs arise, emergency help is often provided by people or groups of people who feel compelled to do something about these on ideological grounds or out of religious conviction.

These groups do not always get the recognition they deserve.

The amendment states that NGOs can also include ideologically-based organisations.

Finally, I would like to state that this is an important communication from the Commission.

It is a sound communication and a sound report on which I would like to congratulate Mrs Sörensen.

I hope that the Member States will adopt a dynamic approach in their future dealings with it.

Mr President, the shameful truth is that our prosperous and free Europe is tolerating a lucrative trade - the trafficking in women - which involves torture, inhumane treatment and flagrant violations of fundamental rights.

The victims have described savage beatings, rapes, abductions, death threats and, on occasions, murders.

The real scandal is that we not only tolerate it in Europe, but we contribute to its expansion.

Every time members of the public purchase the sexual services of a woman trapped in a trafficking ring, they are adding to the abhorrent wealth of these criminal organisations, which employ increasingly cruel methods.

Unfortunately, the institutions' search for solutions is progressing very slowly, and the problem is growing.

In any event, we should recognise that the European Commission' s proposals are, on the whole, reasonable and hopefully useful.

Nevertheless, and given the cross-border nature of this crime, we need to harmonise its classification in all the Member States, including cross-border aspects and universal jurisdiction.

The receiving countries should grant the victims a temporary residence permit for the duration of legal proceedings, regardless of whether or not they wish to testify.

Furthermore, the extremely harsh conditions in which the victims live more than justify the Member States granting them permanent residence permits for humanitarian reasons.

Furthermore, persecution on the basis of gender and, specifically, the trafficking in women, should be considered appropriate grounds for the granting of refugee status.

If we really want to help the victims, we must guarantee their safety as well as that of their families and compensate them through the seizure of the networks' assets.

These victims should also have free access to shelter, medical and psychological assistance, social services, help in finding work, etc.

All of these considerations have been approved practically unanimously by the Committee on Women' s Rights and Equal Opportunities, but they will not be enough.

Combating the trafficking in women and immigration policy must become a priority within the political agenda of the European Union and the Member States.

Immigration policies which revolve around the consequences and which are not aimed at tackling the causes will do nothing more than exacerbate this terrible pattern of exploitation which is tantamount to slavery.

Poverty, social inequality and armed conflict explain migratory flows.

Until we find overall solutions to the question of development, the number of people searching for a better life will be unstoppable and migratory pressure uncontainable.

So let us analyse, assess and implement genuine development and integration policies.

At the end of the day, the fight against the trafficking in human beings, as well as being essential to the establishment of an area of freedom, security and justice, is an unavoidable ethical duty.

Mr President, I would like to start by congratulating Mrs Sörensen.

Not only is she proficient, she is also extremely committed to the subject matter.

The fact that she managed to put this important topic on the European agenda is a huge achievement.

Trafficking in women has been overlooked for too long, and politicians underestimate its importance.

A good illustration of this is that it is now three years since the Justice Ministers declared that it was important to appoint national rapporteurs to monitor trafficking in women.

This actually happened in the Netherlands, not least thanks to the efforts of Secretary of State Verstand.

Unfortunately, many Member States still do not have national rapporteurs and they really should remedy this as soon as possible.

At the same time, legislation as well as cooperation are inadequate.

This report offers many ideas and specific proposals and therefore has the backing of the Liberal Group.

There are, however, two points which may seem commendable, but to which we are unfortunately unable to subscribe.

The first concerns automatic refugee status for victims of trafficking in women.

In our opinion, this is a bridge too far, because this would require the entire Geneva Convention to be overturned.

We do find it important, however, that it should be possible to grant residence permits on humanitarian grounds.

We will therefore continue to support this proposal.

Our second objection concerns the reversal of the burden of proof.

What is required here is tantamount to surrendering an important and fundamental part of legal protection, namely the fact that one is considered innocent until proven guilty.

This principle is important in a constitutional state.

The concept is taken from administrative law and mainly pertains to discrimination at the workplace.

To incorporate this principle into criminal law would be a huge step.

Liberals attach great importance to legal protection and we are not prepared to take that step now.

Finally, the discussion on trafficking in women and people is important and a matter of urgency.

This is why it would be wrong to weigh down this discussion with moral judgements on prostitution, as certain people here are attempting to do.

If we do this, it will make the discussion infinitely more complex and will get in the way of effective measures against the trafficking in women.

The problem is urgent and effective measures are required.

Not just words, but deeds are what are needed now.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I hope you will allow me to speak on behalf of the Greens as my colleague has had to accompany the Member who was taken ill.

In my opinion, it is very fortunate that Mrs Sörensen should have been given the responsibility of preparing this report on trafficking in women.

There are few rapporteurs who have such direct knowledge of this subject for Mrs Sörensen has been concerned for over 20 years with the issues of trafficking in women and prostitution.

We should therefore place our full trust in her proposals. I myself totally support her report.

However, I should like to comment briefly on the discussions held on this subject in committee and also in the Member States, given that the United Nations Conference on the situation of women throughout the world, to be held in New York in June, is now approaching.

In these discussions several rather abolitionist associations have tried to lump together trafficking in women, prostitution and pimping.

They have therefore encouraged a certain amount of generalisation and are, as a result, opposed to any form of debate on these issues, hiding behind moral considerations such as the inalienability of the human body and its treatment as a saleable commodity.

To this end, they have attacked the latest report by the International Labour Office on trafficking in women and prostitution, and the work of Mrs Lin Lean Lim highlighting the need for a statute to protect prostitutes. They have also decried Europe as a pimp on the grounds that certain countries are trying to establish non-abolitionist legislation in this area.

We surely cannot leave an issue such as this in the hands of associations of which some, and only some, having fought against abortion, are now refusing the distribution of condoms to prostitutes, which they see as encouraging prostitution.

There is but a single step from commiseration to stigmatisation and from victimisation to contempt and exclusion from public debate.

The only solution for prostitutes is to be integrated within a common law system, to look after themselves, to live decently, to defend themselves against the violence to which they are subjected by pimps, clients and institutions. The only solution is to recognise prostitutes as such and, as a first step, to give them a voice.

Recognition of their professional activity, full social rights and police protection from any form of violence are what they are demanding.

Whether legislation is abolitionist as in France, prohibitionist as in Sweden or even sometimes regulatory, if it fails to recognise a whole population this can only reinforce discrimination against forced immigrants and also prostitutes, irrespective of whether they are immigrants or not.

The ineffectiveness of the law reinforces the enslavement of male and female prostitutes by pimps, for some, and the impossibility for others of living with dignity or of getting out of prostitution.

This leads to a breakdown in any fragile solidarity and further damage to their self-image. Mrs Roure is right in her analysis of this problem but we accept that different solutions must be examined and that various proposals must be made and considered.

The Commission absolutely must examine all forms of common legislation on prostitution which would give real status to prostitutes in order to protect these women and men from pimping, violence and marginalisation.

Mr President, to begin with, I want to thank Mrs Sörensen for a very good, interesting and tremendously readable report.

We are almost one hundred per cent in agreement in the Committee on Women' s Rights and Equal Opportunities.

We would emphasise not only the cooperation from the police which has fed into this report, but also the importance of contributions at all levels of society.

There are nonetheless two things we do not entirely agree with.

The first concerns the role of the sex industry in this issue.

We are, all of us, right across the political spectrum, completely agreed that it is poverty that is the major cause of prostitution and trafficking in women.

I nonetheless believe that the sex industry, which is now moreover beginning to register some of its activities on the stock exchange, must be called into question and, in future, also held to account.

The other disputed issue is - as always where this subject is concerned - the view to be taken of prostitution.

Almost throughout the report, the term enforced prostitution is used. However, the use of this term implies that there is an opposite, that is to say voluntary prostitution.

That is very strange, especially when we are talking about slavery and trafficking in women.

The Confederal Group of the European United Left/Nordic Green Left has tabled a few amendments, some of them on this subject and in connection with which we naturally hope that we shall receive support.

I would again thank Mrs Sörensen and all our colleagues.

Unfortunately, this is unlikely to be the last time we debate this issue, even though it is so far only the second time we have done so.

Mr President, trafficking in women is not just a women' s issue. It also falls within the wider global context of international crime and trafficking in human beings.

Raising such an issue today might seem anachronistic but slavery will indeed be a part of the 21st century.

It is a potent force which takes advantage of the misery of the displaced who travel the world against their will, who are sold, bought and then brought to Europe.

Nothing is preventing these global pimps from pressurising families to sell their children and luring girls to Europe to make them work and become prostitutes.

During a conference organised jointly by the United States of America and the Philippines in March, the very lucrative aspect of this new market was also raised.

Trafficking in human beings is, after drugs and weapons, the third largest source of income for organised crime.

Yet trafficking in human beings is, above all, a violation of human dignity and human rights.

Our societies are demanding the right to happiness, pleasure and freedom, and the removal of taboos.

It seems not to matter if people, women and children in particular, are paying the price by being dragged down into the underworld.

Prostitution is a form of slavery which we like to make out to be exotic and romantic in order to hide its tragedy and sordidness.

Yet it is actually a denial of freedom.

These crimes are committed solely for the sake of pleasure and are treated with widespread indifference by a society which accepts prostitution as the oldest profession in the world. This is also true of pornography which is found in the daily papers, on television and on the Internet, where everything can be bought, even girls.

Prostitution, trafficking in human beings, sex tourism and paedophilia are all issues highlighted by the media which are gradually becoming less taboo.

So much the better, for the resignation shown towards what society has deemed to be irreversible is intolerable.

We must now help these people whose bodies are being exploited for commercial purposes, both in our countries and in their countries of origin, by increasing aid for development, education and cooperation between countries.

The European Union must wake up to this situation and, rather than giving lessons to the women of the world, five years after the Beijing Conference, it would do better to clean up its own backyard.

Trafficking in human beings is incredibly widespread in our countries because the demand exists and because the European Union is adept at showing itself to be a greedy customer, disdainful of the distress caused to these adults and children who have been denied any choice.

To conclude, I will refer to the slogan of the seminar organised in Paris on 15 May under the patronage of the European Parliament which says that the humiliation of human beings through prostitution represents an intolerable attack on human rights.

Mr President, on behalf of the Members of the Bonino List, I would like to thank the rapporteur for her excellent report on the tragic issue of trafficking in women.

We are sure that Parliament will adopt this extremely well-balanced report by a very large majority, for no one could tolerate the current violence perpetrated against women who are abducted or forced by deception and threats to enter the European Union, where they are compelled to live a life of forced prostitution or do some other sort of job under coercion.

We are all familiar with the horrific stories of prostitutes, often minors, who are abducted from their native countries, forced to enter the Union - we are told - illegally, raped and threatened with retaliation against their relatives or even killed if they have the courage to denounce their pimps.

The report recommends possible solutions which have already been successfully implemented, such as issuing victims with residence permits and providing protection and free healthcare.

These measures, which have already been successfully implemented in some States, must be extended to cover the whole of the European Union.

I would, however, like to draw your attention to a matter of paramount importance: is it not the direct and indirect prohibition of prostitution and the restrictive laws on immigration which are responsible for trafficking in women and forced prostitution?

Is it not the case that the victims of prostitution-related crimes are compelled to enter that profession because of their illegal immigrant status and their vulnerability, caught between the violence of their pimps and the forces of the law?

Is it not the very fact of prohibition which renders the phenomenon it is intended to control uncontrollable, tragic and inhuman?

And why should those people who, of their own free will, want to be prostitutes have to suffer from what is essentially a ban on related activities and the subterfuge which, in practice, criminalise the practice of voluntary prostitution, even though prostitution is formally legal in many Member States?

Moreover, would the legalisation of voluntary prostitution not also allow foreign prostitutes to improve their situation in that they would no longer be obliged to work illegally in violent conditions as they are now?

For this reason, we have tabled two amendments: the first amendment calls for the preparation of a cost/benefit analysis of the various laws and policies currently in place and those which may be adopted in the future; the second amendment proposes measures to protect adults from criminal exploitation and violence, adults who, in all freedom from direct or indirect coercion, choose to work as prostitutes, accepting to run their business in accordance with legal procedures.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, simply raising a problem is an admission of its gravity.

Some 500 000 victims of the traffic in human beings arrive each year in Western Europe.

It is imperative to tackle trafficking in women because, having shown its determination to fight money laundering, drug trafficking and organised crime, the European Union has forgotten that trafficking in human beings is one of the major aspects of organised crime.

I must congratulate Mrs Sörensen on her report which has come on the eve of the enlargement of the Union to the CCEEs, which are often singled out as the countries of origin or transit in prostitution and modern-day slavery.

As for the method, I must say that the fight against trafficking in human beings does not necessarily need full communitarisation but rather close cooperation between Member States under the aegis of Europol and Interpol. These inter-state structures have proven their effectiveness on the ground.

Our aim is to ensure that trafficking in human beings is regarded as a criminal offence to be severely punished in all Member States. In doing so, examples must also be made of those responsible for instigating such networks.

Given the current state of legislation, we are faced with a wide diversity of penal traditions in our Member States.

Establishing specific offences at Community level would therefore lead to an impasse.

Instead, we must take inspiration from the method in the Schmid report on combating fraud and counterfeiting of non-cash means of payment.

The Council of Ministers could, on a proposal from the Commission, draw up a list of criminal behaviour to be combated, which the Member States would be responsible for converting into criminal offences in accordance with their legal traditions.

To conclude, I am sure that this would render the action we are taking to combat this scourge more effective and that we would avoid the pitfalls of a harmonisation which would delay the measures which must now be adopted.

The debate on this report looks set to run into the afternoon, but more specific information on the continuation of the debate and the organisation of business for today' s sitting will be provided later on.

We shall now proceed to the votes.

Mr President, there was to have been a debate on the question of football violence.

The events last night in Copenhagen underline the importance of the European Parliament having this debate, as it decided to do earlier in the week.

Because of the natural difficulties about the location of the matches under Euro 2000, the PPE-ED Group as a whole has decided not to support this resolution and to withdraw it.

On the other hand, the British delegation, which is now 36 members, has retabled the resolution in its original form.

Mr President, I ask you to rule it admissible for this debate to now take place, as was the wish of the House earlier in the week.

The debate will take place as proposed.

The exact time will be announced later.

Mr Purvis, the way we work is that the first resolution tabled is the first taken.

When a compromise is created, if it contains the first resolution, that compromise is taken first, no matter how many groups are involved in the compromise.

Mr President, the resolution by the Green Group was tabled first.

It is perfectly correct that we should vote on that text first as we reached a compromise with a number of other groups.

Indeed, Members throughout this House have supported it.

I hope they will do so during the vote - even some Members of political groups who have not supported that compromise - because the situation at Sellafield is serious.

Let us proceed with the vote and not reopen the debate.

(Parliament rejected the joint motion for a resolution)

Motion for a resolution (B5-0414/2000) by Ms Ahern and others, on safety problems at British Nuclear Fuels' Sellafield site

(Parliament rejected the motion for a resolution)

Joint motion for a resolution on falsification of data concerning MOX fuels at Sellafield

Report (A5-0109/2000) by Mrs Randzio-Plath, on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, on the draft Commission directive amending Directive 80/723/EEC on the transparency of financial relations between Member States and public undertakings (SEC(1999) 404 - C5-0102/2000 - 2000/2065(COS))

Joint motion for a resolution on the external debt of poor countries

Joint motion for a resolution on the situation in Zimbabwe

Report (A5-0094/2000) by Mr Paasilinna, on behalf of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, on the Commission communication to the European Parliament, the Council, the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions on the Fifth Report on the Implementation of the Telecommunications Regulatory Package (COM(1999) 537 - C5-0112/2000 - 2000/2072(COS))

Mr President, I had requested the floor in relation to the vote on Zimbabwe, when we voted mechanically on 12 amendments presented by the so-called Technical Group of Independent Members, and having noted that in no case have they voted in favour of their amendments, they have systematically forced us to vote.

I say this in relation to the Provan report and the reform of the voting system in Parliament.

I believe this is an unacceptable way to proceed.

Mr President, I have an interest in a sector affected by the Commission communication which is the subject of this report.

As a result, I will not take part in any vote on this report.

I must do likewise with regard to the following report by Mr Alyssandrakis on radio spectrum policy, unless you can immediately formally acknowledge my declaration.

Mr President, Mrs Flesch quite rightly declares an interest in matters in which she has an interest.

I suggest that such a declaration is not necessary when voting.

When Members are speaking in debate, either in committee or in plenary, they should declare an interest, but that should not prevent them from voting on a subject.

I do not want to have a debate on this.

I do not want to dig the rules up.

My own memory of the Rules is that you should do it before votes as well.

I also have a financial interest in telecom and space so I will not participate in the vote.

Report (A5-0122/2000) by Mr Alyssandrakis, on behalf of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, on the Commission communication to the Council, the European Parliament, the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions on: "Next Steps in Radio Spectrum Policy - Results of the Public Consultation on the Green Paper" (COM(1999) 538 - C5-0113/2000 - 2000/2073(COS))

Report (A5-0119/2000) by Mr Alyssandrakis, on behalf of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, on the Commission working document: "Towards a coherent European approach for space" (SEC(1999) 789 C5-0336/1999 - 1999/2213(COS))

After the adoption of two amendments:Ford, Glyn (PSE).

Mr President, on a point of order.

These two amendments are very similar to those which were rejected in committee.

Could we be clear that the rapporteur is giving the committee's view and not his own?

I think that is a matter for you to discuss in your committee.

Report (A5-0131/2000) by Mrs Plooij-Van Gorsel, on behalf of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, on the communication of the Commission to the Council, the European Parliament, the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions "Towards a European research area" (COM(2000) 6 - C5-0115/2000 - 2000/2075(COS))

Mr President, I wanted to make the following suggestion.

A number of amendments have been tabled which were, in fact, already in the text when the vote was taken in committee.

With your help, I would like to try to tidy up the report a little and remove a number of redundant items.

In addition, I have an oral amendment to paragraphs L, M, N and O which I have distributed to the different coordinators who assented to it.

Are there any objections to that oral amendment?

Mr President, in these circumstances, an own-initiative report and all this confusion, I propose that it be returned to the competent committee and that they do the work properly.

Mr Barón Crespo, is this a formal request on behalf of the Socialist Group?

Mr President, this is not a formal request, it is an unavoidable comment about the way this House deals with important matters.

We can only vote here on things that have really been worked through in committee.

It really is unacceptable to work like this in this Chamber!

Mr President, with great respect to the rapporteur, she is making a point which was not made at all in the debate last night.

This is a report which had to be produced in great haste.

Two committees made substantial input to it.

It may be that, in the end, there will be some redundancy, but there are different points being made.

Last night the Commissioner gave no indication that he found anything ambiguous or difficult.

It is quite out of order that we should do anything other than vote on each of the points on the voting list.

I would like to thank everyone for their comments but I agree most with the comment made by Mr Hänsch.

Maybe it is useful occasionally to look at how we set about things here in Parliament.

This seems a very enjoyable exercise.

I do not want to start another debate.

The Bureau is looking at the working methods of Parliament.

You will all receive a copy of Mr Provan' s excellent discussion document in the near future.

Mr President, the paragraph 13 which emerged from the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market, states that the Legal Affairs Committee agreed to request biennial reporting, that is to say, reporting every two years.

Whereas, perhaps owing to my curious accent, it was transcribed as "biannual" , which would require two reports a year and would be over-egging the pudding!

I therefore request that this be orally amended to "biennial" .

Report (A5-0125/2000) by Ms Smet and Ms Gröner, on behalf of the Committee on Women' s Rights and Equal Opportunities, on the follow-up to the Beijing Action Platform (2000/2020(INI))

Before the House adjourns you might like to hear the proposal for the organisation of business for the rest of the day.

We are proposing at 3 p.m. to have a debate on the Buitenweg report, followed by the debate on items of topical and urgent debate.

At 6 p.m. we will vote firstly on Buitenweg and then on the urgency resolutions and then after that, on all the other votes on which the debates have closed.

Mr President, on a point of order.

Twice this week we have been in a situation where groups have made requests for a roll-call vote on the final vote of a report and, just before the final vote, the Chamber is told that the roll call has been withdrawn.

What is the situation, because if, for example, a request for a roll call has been made, other groups do not actually make a request so the opportunity to hold a roll-call vote on the final report is denied us?

Could you explain what the situation is?

I accept that it is unsatisfactory that groups can withdraw their requests at any stage.

All I can suggest is a belt-and-braces approach. If you want to ensure that there is a roll call, make a request on behalf of your own group as well.

I accept that it is not a very satisfactory situation.

Mr President, I think there should be an opportunity for someone else to take over the request for a roll-call vote.

There must be a chance to do this if another group withdraws its request.

This is a matter for the Committee on Constitutional Affairs.

Under the present rules there is nothing to stop Members withdrawing their requests for roll-call votes.

Mr President, I did not understand what was to happen with Mrs Sörensen' s report.

Will the debate continue following the debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance?

Otherwise, when is it intended that the debate should take place?

According to the information I received earlier, we were to continue the debate on Mrs Sörensen' s report today, following the vote on topical and urgent subjects of major importance.

You did not say that this was to be the case, however, and I should therefore like to have it confirmed.

As normal after the votes, we will continue with the debates and the first two are Sörensen and Karamanou.

So we will carry on with the debates.

Mr President, I would also like to say a few words on the order of business for this afternoon.

You have indicated that we will start with the Buitenweg report at 3.00 p.m. and that we will vote at 6.00 p.m.

On our desks, we have found an anonymous document which states that we will be voting on the Buitenweg report and also dealing with any remaining votes at 6.00 p.m.

Secondly, the document lists the urgency, debate on which has been concluded, and thirdly, contains urgencies which have not been debated due to a lack of time.

I would like you to confirm whether the third point is being considered and I would like to register a protest against it, because that would mean that we would have to vote on urgencies that have not been debated.

That is correct and that is what the House has agreed to, so that is what we will be doing.

Mr President, I rise on a similar point, because I am not clear what the House has agreed to.

We have agreed to vote at 6 p.m.

What we could do is reduce the amount of speaking time for urgencies so there will be an opportunity for a debate on each of them.

It is certainly not clear to the House that we have agreed to vote on urgencies that have failed to be discussed.

Mr Ford, that is not a matter for the President.

What we have decided is to allocate the first hour of what normally would have been the urgency debate to the Buitenweg report.

That was a decision for the House.

The House is sovereign in these matters.

It is then up to the groups to decide how they allocate speaking time for the urgency debates.

If we have enough time we will do all the debates; if we do not, we will not.

It will depend on how the groups allocate speaking time between the different subjects and that is a matter for the groups, not for the President.

Mr President, we agreed that we would take the debate on Buitenweg, not that we would spend one hour on it.

For example, I have been told that I will be speaking just after an hour into the debate, so I guess the Buitenweg debate will take probably an hour and a half at least.

It was not agreed we would reduce the time of that debate, let us be clear on that.

It was a slip of the tongue.

I believe it is scheduled for an hour and a half.

Again, it will depend on Members' discipline, something that this House is renowned for.

Mr President, on a point of order.

I refer to the comments made in a statement this morning by Mrs Fontaine regarding certain logistical problems in the building.

In the interests of transparency and information to Members, we need to know the extent of the problem of legionella.

Could you provide us with information on that?

What procedures have been put in place?

Has the air-conditioning system now been switched off?

Can we therefore assume that an operation has been undertaken to disinfect the system?

Could you confirm this and, indeed, could Parliament' s presidency confirm that there is no problem with asbestosis which, of course, would be in breach of our own EU directive passed over a decade ago.

I personally am not in a position to answer any of your questions.

I have no information on this subject.

You will have to refer the matter to the President and to the Quaestors.

I will certainly draw attention to your remarks.

EXPLANATIONS OF VOTE - Ferber report (A5-0121/2000)

Mr President, I was unable to assent to the Ferber report.

From Parliament' s viewpoint, there is always a reason to ask for more money for our own operations.

But the European Union will not become more democratic if the European Parliament receives more funding.

Public opinion within Europe requires us to be frugal.

The money that is available should be spent on the needs of our 375 million people and on the protection of our environment, not on the European Parliament as an institution.

I am of the opinion that we could save ourselves a great deal of cost and unnecessary effort if we were to replace the system of reports and rapporteurs by getting the groups to react directly to the planned proposals, as is the case in most national parliaments.

Finally, I am also against donating tax money to European syndicates of political parties and against filling vacancies for interpreters in a way which offers newcomers a poor legal position.

Mr President, I was happy to vote for the Ferber report on the budget for the financial year 2001, but I am not very happy with the minimal amount of space, money and European Union funds it allocates to supporting activities benefiting pensioners and the elderly.

I do not mean that we have to allocate to pensioners, the elderly and their problems the same proportion of our budget as they occupy of society, i.e. approximately 32% at the last count.

I am not saying that 32% of our budget should be allocated to activities related to the elderly, but I would, nevertheless, be very happy with at least 3%, or even 0.3%.

- (NL) I am 100% behind the proposal to in fact allocate 35 vacant posts, funded from the enlargement reserve, to the language sector, provided, however, that all languages of the candidate countries are represented.

This is why I have voted in favour of Amendment No 2.

It is essential that the European Parliament be well prepared for the forthcoming enlargement to include Central and Eastern Europe.

This should coincide with the timely training of professional and highly skilled translators and interpreters.

As previous enlargements have shown, it is not viable to wait for this to happen.

Multilingualism is a prerequisite for the smooth running of the European Parliament for three reasons.

Firstly, on account of the principle of equality, according to which all Members must be able to carry out their work under the same conditions.

Secondly, due to the democratic legitimacy of the European Parliament.

The European Parliament is the democratic representation of the people.

Thirdly, because of the requirement of usefulness.

Multilingualism boosts the efficiency of parliamentary work.

In order to give concrete form to this requirement of multilingualism, we need a debate as a matter of urgency.

In this connection, I would refer to the final report of the working party on "multilingualism" , compiled under the guidance of Mr Cot, in which various specific options have been suggested.

Whichever is adopted, it is clear that linguistic preparation for enlargement should not be postponed any longer.

Mr Ferber' s report, which we are debating today, highlights the need for a more rigorous budget policy for our institution. We are in favour of this.

The limited increase of 2.28% in Parliament' s budget proposed for the financial year 2001, which works out at EUR 987.8 million, seems acceptable, all the more so as this proposal uses a realistic inflation rate of around 2%.

The amount proposed corresponds to 20% of the appropriations for heading five and therefore respects the ceiling which the European Parliament itself set for 2001.

However, in view of the need to deal with the consequences, including linguistic ones, of future enlargements, this limited increase in the budget of our institution more than ever requires rational and responsible management of this budget.

In terms of staff policy, an analysis should therefore be carried out, as requested in the report, of the current profiles of the institution' s staff, in the light of Parliament' s clearly changing needs, in order to make the best possible preparations for the necessary structural adaptations.

With regard to the Court of Auditors' comments on the expenditure of the political groups, the resolution seems to be heading in the right direction by inviting the Parliament' s Bureau and Secretary-General to achieve complete transparency in the use of appropriations.

The French delegation of the Union for a Europe of Nations Group cannot, however, accept the idea of entering appropriations intended for European political parties on a separate budget line. We have absolutely no doubt that this would eventually favour the alliances, associations and groupings of European political parties with an essentially federalist and integrationist aim.

With regard to language, this is by nature one of the most sensitive issues as it affects our identity, culture and pride. We are all more or less aware that the current situation cannot continue, even less so given the imminent enlargements.

As a result, it is up to us to reflect and to act wisely and carefully, without upsetting any sensibilities, but also without wasting any time.

One of the possible ways forward could be to recognise for each of us, as the elected representatives of our people, the inalienable right to speak in our own language. This would then be interpreted or translated into one of the three most widely used languages according to the demographic, cultural and economic factors which prevail in the European Union.

These three languages are clearly French, German and English. In this way, respect for the identities, nations and cultures of Europe and cost-effectiveness in the daily work of the European institutions could be combined.

This solution would also have the virtue of recognising the three main cultures and origins of the European Union in its current composition, namely the Latin, Anglo-Saxon and Germanic components.

This solution would also offer the undeniable advantage of benefiting all the European candidate countries whose first foreign language is French, German or English.

Finally, whereas one of these languages is particularly important in Europe, the other two are used worldwide.

- (NL) Democracy inevitably costs a great deal of money. We are voting on a Parliament budget to the tune of nearly EUR 1 billion!

A huge sum, although it remains within the agreed 20% of the estimate for all European institutions put together.

We owe it to the citizens of Europe - the taxpayers, who have to produce this kind of capital - to keep the costs in check.

Reading in paragraph 18 about the buildings which Parliament needs, we can only conclude that a considerable amount of Community money is being squandered. Indeed, the European Parliament has no need at all for the building in which we are meeting this week!

We have everything we need in Brussels in terms of facilities.

Let it be clear that we have no need to buy this glass palace, whatever - I am sure - necessary conditions are being met.

Recently, more than 400 Members once again stated that we want to decide for ourselves where we meet.

We are hardly blaming the rapporteur for overlooking this in his report, which certainly deserves appreciation, for example, when he calls on the Council and European Parliament to agree on the statute of the Members.

This Parliament should be deeply ashamed of the fact that, one year after the elections, this is still not even in sight.

The budget line suggested by the Court of Auditors for European parties is really not necessary.

All-embracing budget lines of this kind blur our cultural and political diversity and increase the distance between ourselves and the citizen.

As far as the many thefts in the buildings are concerned, it is unacceptable that, despite an extensive security service, these can take place more or less on a daily basis.

With our vote against this budget, we want to send out a signal that a radical change is required in the priorities we set.

- (NL) I would like to congratulate my colleague, Mr Ferber, on his report, although I did not agree with everything and voted - against his recommendation - for Amendment No 2 and against Amendment No 8 of his draft resolution.

I have done so with great conviction because I am of the view that we as the European Parliament do not send out a political signal or pre-empt a political decision by adopting the Secretary-General' s proposal (and filling 35 vacancies in the language sector) but accomplish this by doing the exact opposite.

As long as the House rules on language use are not amended, the candidate countries and ourselves can assume that the language arrangement will stay as it is, that is to say: first of all, that each MEP can use his own language at official meetings.

Secondly, that each MEP has documents in his language at his disposal.

Thirdly, that we in this way are not only treating the Members equally but above all, the citizens we represent.

- (DE) I voted for Mr Ferber' s report on our budget for 2001, but I cannot let this opportunity pass without protesting in the strongest terms against what can only be described as the blackmail practised against certain categories of officials, particular more junior ones, so that they find themselves 'voluntarily compelled' to transfer from Luxembourg to Brussels, on the pretext that they are in Brussels or Strasbourg 'en mission' , i.e. on business, for more than 50 working days per year.

The European Parliament now has three places of work: Brussels, Luxembourg and Strasbourg.

This was agreed by the Heads of State and Government at their summit in Edinburgh years ago.

We have to live with this, and with its financial consequences, which are not so great, and which are certainly justified by avoiding unhealthy centralisation in Brussels, as is unfortunately practised by a good third of the present Members of the European Parliament.

We are now suffering from an example of this centralisation at the hands of certain Green Members, who prevented a number of important votes on the Friday of the April Strasbourg part-session, because the quorum of one third of the Members present was not established.

I have been a Member of this Parliament since 1965, with a break between 1974 and 1989, so I have 20 years' of attendance behind me, during which time I was present at every Friday sitting in Strasbourg.

The flimsy arguments put forward by those who want to reduce the European Parliament' s five-day week in Strasbourg to four days, and who would also prefer not to turn up here on Mondays, are part of their salami tactics, which are obviously aimed at sabotaging Parliament' s seat in Strasbourg for 12 sittings each year, not to mention their objective of transferring the offices of the Secretariat from Luxembourg to Brussels.

The Bureau now intends to present a working paper by a British Vice-President which proposes moving all the services and Directorates-General from Luxembourg to Brussels.

The idea is to keep at most the specialist services such as the printing and translating services in Luxembourg.

This cannot and will not happen.

It would be a clear infringement of the letter and the spirit of the decisions made by the Heads of State and Government about Parliament' s places of work, and this needs to be said here in the clearest possible terms.

I have a word of warning for those people who are using these salami tactics against Strasbourg and Brussels.

We will thwart your highly undemocratic machinations against democratically reached decisions about Parliament' s places of work and about the calendar of meetings - because we have right on our side.

I voted for the Katiforis report on the broad guidelines of the economic policies of the Member States because of the important points contained therein, but I did so unwillingly.

This was because this report repeatedly states that we must react to the fact that the population is ageing and control it - the number of elderly people is constantly increasing, making it difficult to maintain pension systems - and that we need to be vigilant and call upon the Member States to spend increasingly less money on pension payments for the elderly.

In my opinion, it is absolutely unacceptable that the elderly continue to be blamed for national budgetary difficulties.

Mr President, as the rapporteur rightly mentions in the second point in his report, budget consolidation must be given the highest priority at present.

We can only increase the confidence of the public and, above all, of the financial markets in the euro by means of consistent budgetary discipline.

I say all this bearing in mind that the euro yesterday sank near to its historic low of 3 May.

The rapporteur was unable to include the stability programme which has now been presented by the Austrian Government in his report.

I would therefore like to point out that the new government is determined to overcome the problems that the previous government left behind.

The old government led by the Social Democrats certainly did not bequeath it an easy task.

However, all the commitments in the Stability Pact should now be fully met for the year 2000.

(EL) Despite the objective of increasing productivity, investment and employment levels in the Union, the Commission' s broad guidelines of the economic policies of the Member States and the Community are a set of negative guidelines: continuing budgetary restrictions which go beyond the requirements of the Stability Pact, wage restrictions, tax reforms for the benefit of the better off, further disintegration of the labour market and the crucial importance of competition policy, which brings pressure to bear on the principles of social justice.

The Committee on Economic and Monetary Policy, despite the sensitivity of its rapporteur, Mr Katiforis, has maintained the spirit of the Commission' s recommendation, which is why I shall vote against the motion for a resolution.

The Union should promote a policy which combines quantitative development with a reduction in working times, increased productivity, tax reforms to support society and development and the modernisation, not the eradication, of the public sector.

The Katiforis report is a crude apology for the broad economic policy guidelines of the Member States.

Of its 29 paragraphs, eight start by showing approval and four by being self-congratulatory.

For the working population and just about everyone else in the countries of the European Union, there is really nothing for which to congratulate oneself.

What good is the economic growth vaunted by the report when it is recommended that 'reasonable attitudes in wage negotiations' are adopted, by employees of course, or when it is presumptuously claimed that 'a drastic revision of pension systems' is needed with the aim of 'safeguarding their financial soundness' ?

This is simply a way of acknowledging that, in this 'growth' which the Katiforis report asks Parliament to congratulate, there is no room for employees or pensioners.

Once again, the Council and Commission are acting on behalf of employers and are asking Parliament to give its backing to this.

As far as we are concerned, we were not elected to congratulate governments which help employers and major financial groups to get rich by exacerbating inequalities, leaving 18 million men and women unemployed, making flexibility and precariousness widespread and drastically reducing the wage bill in order to ensure continued growth in capital income, including in its most parasitic and speculative forms.

If, as the report states, it is true that growth is returning, it is simply disgraceful that only a small minority in Europe will benefit from this.

As a result we have voted against the report.

I approved Mr Katiforis' s approach and arguments in committee.

I was due to say this yesterday during the debate in plenary but a technical problem prevented me from doing so for which I apologise.

Like Mr Katiforis, I am delighted to see renewed growth in Europe.

However, also like the rapporteur, I know that this will not be enough to enable a return to a situation of full employment without the Member States adopting a proactive policy and, I would add, without a reduction in working hours.

Finally, I too would say that employment cannot be generated by unbridled liberalisation, accelerated privatisation and a reduction of social and labour protection.

I am not satisfied with everything on which we voted at midday but I have supported the rapporteur in the final vote.

- (PT) In its broad economic policy guidelines for 2000, the European Commission makes it clear that it advocates neo-liberal policies, emphasising as it does the Stability Pact and monetarist policies, faster liberalisation of the telecommunications, energy, postal services, transport and financial services sectors, together with an increase in flexible working arrangements and in the modernisation of social protection systems.

This means that despite referring to the need for active employment policies to combat unemployment and to achieve full employment in the medium term, the Commission continues to prescribe the same solutions, which have not brought any net improvement in employment, since the current unemployment rate is even higher than it was at the start of the decade, as the Commission recognises.

In this European Parliament report, the rapporteur makes some criticisms of the acceleration of the convergence and stability criteria objectives, insists on the need to increase investment and accepts the adoption of global fiscal measures in order to combat financial speculation.

This is a positive step. Nevertheless, he accepts faster liberalisation of the transport and energy sectors, an increase in flexible working and the process of budget consolidation already under way, thus highlighting his own contradictions.

We have presented various amendments with a view to improving the content of the report. In particular, these are designed to strengthen the position of small and micro-enterprises and their associations, to advocate jobs associated with proper rights and reduced working hours, and to call into question the Stability Pact and the consequences of implementing it.

Unfortunately, with the exception of support for SMEs, we were unable to have any of these amendments adopted, and have therefore voted against the report.

I must firstly congratulate the rapporteur on the quality of his work.

The broad guidelines of European economic policy developed in this report seem to be heading in the right direction.

Full employment and the transition to a knowledge-based economy form our common aim for the first decade of the 21st century.

Whether or not the pessimists like this, all the economic lights are on green.

We must therefore be bold in order to continue the growth now being witnessed at European level.

The prospects for the years 2000 and 2001 are encouraging, with growth forecasts of over 3%. This will reinforce social links, increase solidarity and equal opportunities and, in particular, eliminate the inevitability of the mass unemployment which we have been enduring for too long.

This last point clearly poses the main problem.

Although unemployment has already gradually reduced, it is still at an unacceptable level throughout the Community, given the forecasts for 2001 of 8% unemployment among the working population. This is particularly true at the outer edges of the Community, in other words in the most remote regions.

As I have said many times before, the fruits of growth must be shared equally by all European citizens, both mainlanders and islanders.

This is the price of constructing a 21st century Europe with a human face in whose collective development everyone is involved. In this way we will all be able to make progress in our own individual areas, but still be heading in the same general direction.

I voted in favour of the report by Mr Katiforis because I believe in this Europe.

The Katiforis report is an incredible demonstration of the lack of awareness among European capitalists.

It is based on a total misunderstanding of the reasons for the current recovery which is in no way the result of neo-liberal policies favouring wage austerity and a strong currency.

On the contrary, current job creations are due to an economic context characterised by an increase in consumption among wage-earners and a weak euro favouring exports.

Despite this convenient denial, the report proposes to plunge further into social regression. It proposes increased flexibility in the markets, starting with the labour market.

It calls for 'wage stability' and exhorts the unions to adopt 'reasonable attitudes' in wage negotiations.

So as not to appear to be the direct spokesperson for employers, the report tries to include some social clauses.

Yet the contradictions are striking. How, for example, can it propose the reform or 'modernisation' of social protection, which in practice means replacing solidarity with financial products, and yet invoke a 'spirit of social cohesion' ?

How can wages be restricted 'in a spirit of fairness' when profits reveal unashamed exuberance?

The only other argument in the report invokes the use of new technologies to bring about modernisation.

But why should these automatically be allowed to threaten the European social model?

This crude materialism, sometimes attributed to Marxists, has now been adopted by cynical capitalists whose only aim is to extend the rule of trade regardless of social needs.

We have therefore voted against a text which is both foolish and repugnant.

Mr Katiforis' s explanatory statement is clearly better than the main body of his report which contains no hint of the criticisms that were set out on the Commission' s recommendation.

I and the National Front Members have voted against this report as we feel that it recommends the same old ineffectual and even harmful recipes. There is still too much emphasis on the markets, which regulate nothing, on ultraliberalism, particularly in the public services which the Commission would like to see dismantled, on sacrificing social protection for public investment to ensure budgetary stability, and on price stability, whereas inflation was curbed ages ago.

For workers there is wage moderation, a reduction in unemployment benefits and a relaxation of employment protection legislation.

Two points have particularly shaken us.

The first is that the Commission recommends that my country, France, which is struggling under the weight of tax and social security contributions, should not take advantage of this growth to reduce taxes. The reason given for this is to avoid stimulating with the budget a level of economic activity which is already vigorous.

Since when has growth been rejected in the name of outdated economic dogmas?

The second point is the almost total absence of any reference to the euro. This famous single currency which, it was said, would bring us a prosperous future and be snapped up by the whole world eager for competition with the US dollar, has been cold-shouldered, not only by investors who are investing in dollars in the USA, but also by the central banks.

No one has any confidence in the euro, which is no longer a floating currency. Rather, it is a sinking currency, and nor do they have confidence in the European monetary authorities.

Wim Duisenberg is not Allan Greenspan, the ECB is not the Federal Reserve and the euro is not the dollar.

Europe has neither the employment rate nor the growth rate of the USA and it will take more than futile gestures to change this reality.

- (PT) The Pomés Ruiz report rigorously defends the principles of the Solidarity Pact, particularly as regards fiscal consolidation as a means of ensuring the sole objective of price stability.

The analysis of the nominal convergence criteria is silent with regard to its consequences in terms of the risk of economic deflation, the adverse effect on public investment, economic growth and policies to combat unemployment.

However, the rapporteur goes even further in supporting the Commission' s recommendations.

He believes that it is necessary to anticipate in good time the objectives put forward in the stability and convergence programmes, so as to take advantage of the current 'much-improved economic environment' .

He therefore proposes swifter acceleration of fiscal consolidation, of structural reforms and of privatisation, and the "modernisation" of social protection, recommendations which have, in fact, already been made by the European Commission, particularly with regard to Portugal, in relation to the liberalisation of transport and energy and labour market flexibility, which is unacceptable.

We have accordingly voted against the report.

Mr President, I have already declared, during the debate on the decision to allow Greece to enter the European single currency, that I am totally in favour of Greece' s immediate entry, for it has met all the criteria required by the Treaties of the European Union.

I would stress that I particularly welcome the fact - and that is why I voted for this decision - that no more budgetary restrictions are to be imposed on Greece, for, sadly, the brunt of this could not fail to fall upon pensioners and the elderly, in this case Greek pensioners and elderly people, who would be the victims of the exacerbation of the situation as regards the country' s budget, for Greece is willing to further reduce the negative elements of the Maastricht criteria and we have recommended that it do so, even though it does already fulfil these criteria, as has been stated.

- (EL) The legislative proposal of the European Parliament merely accepts the proposal by the Commission of the European Union, which confines itself to finding that "Greece fulfils the necessary conditions for the adoption of the single currency.

The derogation of Greece is abrogated with effect from 1 January 2000" .

On the surface, Greece does indeed meet the budgetary and monetary indicators required for EMU.

To this extent, and taking account of the position of my party, Synaspismos (the Coalition of the Left and Progress), in favour of Greece' s accession to Economic and Monetary Union, I have voted in favour.

Personally, however, I have strong objections to and reservations about the policies of EMU, which tie the Member States into rigid budgetary austerity, rising unemployment, worsening social conflict and unbridled competition, without being able to offer a strong European currency which is able to stand up to the dollar worldwide.

I am also totally opposed to the way in which the Greek government has achieved our accession to EMU, pursuing nominal rather than de facto convergence, making Greece one of the countries of the Union with the highest rates of unemployment and continually selling off the state' s assets in order to cover treasury deficits.

Unfortunately, these policies will not end when we accede to EMU; on the contrary, they will be institutionalised, consolidated and set in stone.

The Left and Progressive Forces of the Member States of EMU must extend their collaboration so that they can radically reform the way in which EMU is structured and so that priority can be given to social criteria and promoting the fight against unemployment, real convergence policies and viable and fair development policies.

- (EL) The European Parliament is being called upon today to give its opinion on the adoption by Greece of the single currency, now that the Commission and the European Central Bank have given the go-ahead.

We would start by pointing out that, as far as we are concerned, the matter is not technical, it is highly political.

It is precisely on the basis of the ideological and political aspects of the entire process of EMU and the single currency that we shall be voting against the admission of the drachma to the euro zone.

From a technical point of view, Greece has undisputedly managed to fulfil the criteria set in the Maastricht Treaty for entering the third stage of EMU.

The problem, however, is how we got here and what happens next.

The nominal convergence criteria have been achieved at the cost of intolerable sacrifice on the part of the Greek people and as the result of a harsh austerity policy, the main features of which were, and still are, reduced social spending, a highly restricted budgetary policy, wage freezes, limited protection for workers, deregulated markets and greater privatisation.

Unfortunately, this policy, which has reduced large groups of the population to despair and has resulted in a dramatic rise in unemployment, a mass exodus from farming and the closure of factories throughout the country, will not be repealed when we enter the single currency; on the contrary, it will be stepped up.

Both the obligations imposed by the Stability Pact and the strict recommendations accompanying the reports by the Commission and the European Central Bank prove it.

Both demand that we continue the austerity policy, dismantle labour relations even more quickly, rush in measures to repeal the social security system and continue and accelerate the process of privatisation.

It is obvious that the workers have nothing to gain from Greece' s accession to the single currency amidst disorientating celebrations; on the contrary, they are even more certain to see a continuation, on stricter terms and with increased "supervision from on high" on the part of the EU, of the dead-end austerity policy which has been exercised for the last ten years.

Besides, those who speak of the need to safeguard the "sustainability" of the criteria seek solely to ensure that it is easier to harden the present policy and support the anti-grass roots measures yet to come.

The experience of other countries already in the euro zone proves that one new measure after another is introduced in order to reverse what has been achieved over previous decades and the "American model" is now the example to be followed by the famous European social model.

We, the MEPs of the ÊÊÅ, who stand by the positions to which we subscribed when the Maastricht Treaty was signed and which only the ÊÊÅ voted against when the time came to ratify it in the Greek national parliament, will be voting against Greece' s accession to the euro zone on the grounds of the workers' and Greece' s interests.

At the same time, we and the workers shall continue to fight against this policy and to promote an alternative development policy which focuses on man and his needs and which takes the opposite line from the reactionary policies of the 'democracy of the monopolies' .

- (NL) I have voted in favour of the Goebbels report and, as such, for Greece' s joining the single currency.

I have voted with just as much conviction for the amendments to the Pomés Ruiz report.

These amendments specifically underline a sensitive issue which gave us plenty to talk about, not only in the plenary debate, but also in the Economic Committee meetings.

Many MEPs have expressed doubts about, in particular, the sustainability of the convergence and stability policy of the Member States.

We have all been able to see how the pleas addressed to Greece to make further efforts to reduce its debt and to obtain lasting stability do not only pertain to the situation of Greece itself, but also to the discontent about the way in which other Member States with a very high debt ratio have behaved, not making sufficient use of the options available to them, as a result of economic growth and low interest rates, to reduce the debt.

Let us hope that Parliament' s subdued criticism gets through to the relevant parties. This includes the Belgian government, which has already made so many pledges that even the press is starting to question the viability of this spending impulse.

Precisely because the hesitation expressed on the occasion of Greece' s joining the euro does not so much concern Greece as represent a general criticism, I am of the opinion that Greece should not be allowed to become the victim of this hesitation.

Greece is welcome in euroland, and all Member States in the euro zone must respect the letter and spirit of the Stability and Growth Pact.

Mr President, the vote on Sellafield was a first for the European Parliament.

I think it is the first time that the European Parliament has spoken in favour of uniform safety standards for nuclear power stations.

I believe that the Council should, as a matter of urgency, and before the first accessions take place, resolve to draw up and implement such safety standards.

Mr President, I voted for the Randzio-Plath report on the distortion of competition where public undertakings are concerned.

When Commissioner Monti gave his response at the end of the debate, he declared that the aid provided for public undertakings must not be out of proportion with the quality of the public service provided.

So I wonder: there are public and private television broadcasting companies in Italy, for example, where a great deal of money is allocated to the public television services. However, this is, in actual fact, excessive, for there is no difference between the service provided by the private broadcasting companies and that provided by the public broadcasting companies.

This is a distortion of competition.

Let us take another sector: state and private pensions.

State pensions are heavily financed but provide services which are inferior to those provided by private pensions: this is not true competition.

The report indicates the need for financial transparency between Member States and undertakings.

However, it is only interested in transparency with regard to public undertakings and only in terms of finding out whether state aid distorts competition between public and private undertakings.

The fact of an undertaking deciding to lay off some of its staff, leading to further unemployment, when a small part of its profits could be used to keep these jobs, is of absolutely no interest to the European Commission.

It is also not interested in the damage to the environment and to the safety and working conditions of employees caused by the race for maximum profits.

More generally, the Commission is totally unconcerned about the complete lack of transparency which surrounds the fundamental decisions of all undertakings, such as the way in which they make their profits and the way they use these, even if to the detriment of society.

We will vote against this draft directive and reaffirm that, in the interests of society, we must have total transparency in the operation and accounts of all undertakings, both public and private, and the abolition of secrecy in business.

The first step in this area should be to repeal all laws which threaten to punish the employees of an undertaking who tell the public and users everything they know about the workings of this undertaking.

- (PT) On the grounds that it is necessary to identify and prevent the granting of subsidies that distort competition and to increase transparency in relations between the State and public enterprises, the Commission is creating bureaucratic arrangements and real restrictions which may undermine the delivery of high-quality public services.

By taking as its basic philosophy the need to ensure competition between the public and private sectors, the Commission has, in fact, ended up undervaluing the important role of public enterprises which provide public services, and this is unacceptable.

The rapporteur' s original report recognised the value of "services of general economic interest" , but her report was subsequently amended, particularly with regard to public broadcasting systems.

We believe that it is right that the directive does not apply to public broadcasting organisations, in view of their specific nature, which cannot be divorced from the democratic, social and cultural needs of the various Member States, and the negative impact that this would have on their ability to fulfil their public service mission.

This was the reasoning behind our amendment, which was unfortunately rejected.

The external debt of the developing countries poses a major challenge.

The 50 poorest countries spend twice as much servicing their debt as they receive in aid.

The UNCTAD report on sub-Saharan Africa shows that African countries have not received any benefit from structural adjustment programmes for over ten years.

The proposal is very restrictive and is limited to the poorest, highly indebted countries.

It imposes far too many conditions on the countries requiring debt relief.

I regret any conditions which are imposed, particularly any link between debt relief and the application of structural adjustment measures.

This is why I have abstained from the vote on the motion for a resolution.

I am in favour of very substantial debt relief for all the countries concerned and debt cancellation for the poorest ones.

- (IT) I abstained from the vote on the joint resolution on poor countries' debt because I feel that it is wishy-washy and ambiguous in the face of the financial mechanisms known to us all which plunge the greater part of humanity into the most abject poverty.

Today, even the multilateral organisations such as the World Bank and the IMF are talking of reducing the debt, for the mechanisms stifling the economies no longer make sense, even from a neoliberal perspective.

At the June 1999 G7 Summit, the United States, the United Kingdom and other countries talked of reducing the poor countries' debt to 90%.

If we look closely at these proposals, we see that they would not really be a solution, for if these measures were to be applied, they would only affect 8% or, at most, 10% of the debt of the 41 countries involved, which is, at the outside, 1% of the total Third World debt.

But these same measures are given minimal application, which has tragic consequences for the indebted countries, but which benefits the creditors themselves in terms of export loans, financial bodies and multinationals, for example.

First of all, we must acknowledge that the Third World debt is illegal.

Therefore, the European Union should promote an international, bilateral and multilateral action cancelling the Third World debt with no conditions attached.

The Member States must cancel the debts of the poor countries in practical terms and urge the international bodies which represent them to take similar steps.

We must ensure that the cancellation of debts is not conditional upon cooperation, as is often the case, or linked to any sort of structural adjustment measure.

We have to influence the financial mechanisms which caused this debt and the structural adjustment policies which continue to contribute to it, spreading poverty throughout these countries.

It is in the nature of things that the extreme right should put forward crass arguments to defend the right of 4 500 landowners of European origin to monopolise the best land in Zimbabwe.

Yet the fact that the joint motion for a resolution calls for law and order to be enforced and condemns 'the illegal occupations' and accompanying violence is pure hypocrisy.

We might have more faith in the sincerity of the authors of this motion in 'deploring the recent murders, beatings and intimidation associated with the ...occupation' if they at least deigned to recall the past massacres in which a handful of colonists dispossessed the indigenous population of its land and the decades of colonial violence and apartheid used to preserve this situation.

The Mugabe regime is authoritarian and corrupt.

Yet neither this authoritarianism nor this corruption bothered the defenders of the wealthy minority and the old colonial power until this authoritarianism was used to attack their interests and privileges.

We have therefore not only voted against this motion but must also denounce the cynicism and hypocrisy of those who defend the interests of the privileged whites in Zimbabwe.

It will be up to the poor population of this country to settle its account with Mugabe and his regime, and certainly not the political servants of those who have grown rich by pillaging this country.

Mr President, I voted for the Paasilinna report on the telecommunications regulatory package but I found it unsatisfactory as well.

Not enough effort is being put into these European Union directives on telecommunications, if it is true that the result is that, sadly, we are still without a European television frequency and we do not yet have a European television channel or even a mere radio station.

Neither Parliament nor our meetings are broadcast anywhere in Europe.

European Union telecommunications directives ought to relate to the European Union.

In 1993 the European Union and the Member States undertook to liberalise the telecommunication services sector.

This undertaking led to the adoption of a series of directives.

Behind the regulations was a political objective of ensuring growth, employment and competitiveness and of giving everyone access to the information society while ensuring adequate legal protection.

The Commission has played a supervisory role in this which has resulted in a series of reports since May 1997.

The Commission communication before us today is part of this process and the assessment presented is balanced to say the least.

Approximately two years after full liberalisation, the telecommunication services markets in the Member States are characterised by a rising growth rate, many new arrivals and falling charges.

A 'digital divide' is apparent between both regions and citizens.

The reason for this is clearly the cost of access to these new services.

The exclusion of some citizens from the new information technology society cannot be tolerated.

The preservation of universal service must therefore ensure the inclusive nature of this society.

We must make certain that the regulations being prepared, which have been submitted to this Parliament, adopt this approach.

Due to a desire to see the cost of access to the Internet lowered and for this to be accessible to all citizens, Parliament insists in its report on the need to open up competition in the local loop.

This measure must be thoroughly discussed with the national authorities in order to respond to the relevant objections.

A major effort must be made in terms of harmonisation and simplification of rules.

I am thinking for example of the rules on consumer protection, those governing the operation and role of the National Regulatory Authorities (NRAs) and the licensing systems.

To conclude, I would say that the telecommunications liberalisation process is not an end in itself but a step towards ensuring the transition to the information society.

There is still a long way to go and we must not forget that the jobs created must be lasting and of a high quality.

- (PT) We feel bound to criticise the assumptions underlying this report, in particular those concerning faster liberalisation of the telecommunications sector, which are founded on the basic premise that this process has brought benefits to the users of these services. We only need to look at Portugal' s experience in this respect.

Portugal Telecom, a public enterprise which has received billions of escudos of public investment, has been partially privatised, which has led to an increase in charges to what are called 'residential users' - the majority of the population - who today face the 'highest charges in Europe' .

As regards the workforce, thousands of jobs have been cut, stricter working conditions have been introduced, and in many cases workers are poorly paid and have few rights. In other words, the overriding aim has been to maximise profit in a sector which is already highly profitable, and this has led to cuts in investment which have affected the quality of the overall service provided for the majority of users.

We do not think this is the right way to proceed.

We need a modern public telecommunications service which embraces technical and scientific progress.

We need an affordable public service based on equal access and guaranteed users' rights - a service that forms part of balanced development.

We also want to see improvements in conditions of employment for the workforce in this sector.

- (SV) It is extremely important that the EU' s legislation and accompanying rules in the area of telecommunications should be updated concurrently with the explosive global development where digital and mobile communication is concerned.

It is also important that this should take place within the framework of the conditions of the internal market and with a view to safeguarding free competition.

In this context, the report illuminates a number of important aspects.

What the report does not discuss, and what the Commission' s report does not take account of, either, are the different conditions prevailing in the EU' s Member States when it comes to developing and maintaining different types of network.

When it comes to Sweden, which is sparsely populated and where there are significant distances between one locality and another, the public service element has a relatively larger role to play than elsewhere when it comes to the functions and investments of the telecommunications industry.

Where society' s opportunities for investment and decision making are concerned, together with citizens' ability to access functioning communications networks of equal quality, the consequences of completely opening up the markets for telecommunications networks in the way described in the report are unclear.

I therefore abstained from voting on this report.

Mr President, I voted for this report, which is the first Alyssandrakis report on radio frequencies, which are nowadays used chiefly to advance mobile phone communications technology.

This directive also has some shortcomings, for there is insufficient focus on adaptation, teaching, refresher courses and the use of these new communications systems by pensioners and the elderly.

I am not referring to pensioners and the elderly in general, but, in this case, I am referring to my mother.

My mother lives in Rome. She is 85 years old, it is true, but I have not yet managed to persuade her to let me give her a mobile phone because she would not know how to use it.

She would find it extremely useful and also a saving, but she will not be persuaded.

I offered to teach her, but she refused.

This means that the elderly are not able to benefit from progress.

Mr President, in relation to the second Alyssandrakis report, I must mention my daughter.

When I met her this morning - I did not see her last night for I was here, in this Chamber, speaking on this report - she asked me: "But Daddy, is it true that you want to become an astronaut and go to the moon?

That is what they told me when I arrived here this morning."

I had to reply: "Yes, it is true" , for when I took the floor yesterday - and I repeat the request again now - I called for progress to be made in European space research and I mentioned the fact that, in the United States, there was an astronaut, a politician, who went into space at the age of 69, that is when he was a pensioner. I would like there to be a European astronaut, also a politician, who will become an astronaut in 15 years' time at the age of 69.

I therefore put my name forward to become the first European Union astronaut.

Maybe you should give your mother the spaceship and your daughter the telephone.

Mr President, although I voted for the report, I would like the following point to be minuted. Coordination of European research activity must not result in competition between research institutes disappearing.

The limits on communitarisation imposed by the principle of subsidiarity should therefore be kept in mind.

The standardisation of rights concerning intangible assets has already proved its value in the case of trademark law and copyright.

The present system for filing patent applications obliges the applicant to file a patent application separately in each Member State, which inevitably results in an undesirable fragmentation of the European market.

The logical conclusion is therefore to create a Community patent.

Decision makers at national level will have to be sufficiently far-sighted if this ambitious project is to succeed.

The competitiveness of the entire European Union must be taken into account when research contracts are being awarded.

Mr President, I voted for the Plooij-Van Gorsel report on the communication "Towards a European research area" , although I would have been very pleased if the decision had at last been taken to place all the research carried out throughout Europe at various levels of government under the same umbrella. Town, provincial and regional councils all spend money on research, the individual State governments spend money on research and so does the European Union.

All this money should be managed by a single expenditure centre: the European Union.

I am concerned because I would like to see more research in the field of science which aims to prolong human life.

I am concerned because I would not like the State budgets and pension agencies to try to hold back this research, which would have negative implications for them because of the greater expenditure they would incur.

- (EL) Although there are certain positive aspects to Mrs Plooij-Van Gorsel' s report, it is driven by the perception that the purpose of research is to serve corporate interests and produce new knowledge - mainly of commercial value - on demand, within the framework of the liberalisation of the market and of competition.

Any research policy based on this sort of perception and which serves this sort of policy is bound to distort the nature of research as a procedure for producing new knowledge and as a productive power.

What research basically needs is an increase in its funding, which is unacceptably low for the European Union as a whole (1.8% of GDP compared with 2.8% in the USA and 2.9% in Japan), while countries such as Greece, which is at the bottom of the EU league, spend a miserable 0.5%.

Increased funding will allow new research activities to be developed and use to be made of the plethora of unemployed, highly-specialised young researchers, of which there is an abundance, at least in Greece.

Funding must be provided by public agencies within the framework of research activity programmes which will support both basic research and applications, the final purpose of which should be to improve the quality of life for all mankind and not swell the coffers of the monopolies.

International collaboration plays a primordial role in the research process, and its further development, both between the Member States of the EU and with other countries, would be both desirable and welcome.

However, ensuring that overall research efforts in the countries of the EU serve the interests of big business, solely with a view to increasing their profits, is undesirable and constitutes a repulsive prospect for the future of mankind.

This is why the MEPs of the ÊÊÅ shall be voting against Mrs Plooij-Van Gorsel' s report.

- (PT) It is important to note that despite all the declarations of intent made by the European institutions about the new economy, and despite the trend towards a digital, knowledge-based economy driven by the existence of new goods and services, the European Union' s total research effort as a function of its GDP has been in continuous decline for ten years. On average, the EU devotes just 1.8% of its GDP to research, compared with 2.8% in the USA and 2.9% in Japan.

According to the Commission communication, the gap between total public and private expenditure on research in the USA and in the EU is continuing to widen, having grown from EUR 12 billion in 1992 to some EUR 60 billion in 1998.

Similarly, in terms of employment, there are just 2.5 researchers for every thousand workers in European companies, compared with 6.7 per thousand in the USA and 6 per thousand in Japan.

Yet we know that research and technology contribute between 25% and 50% to economic growth and play an important part in the competitiveness, employment and quality of life of Europe' s citizens.

This being the case, how can the Heads of Government of the 15 Member States of the European Union pledge to achieve a new strategic objective for the next decade, that is to make the European Union the most dynamic and competitive knowledge­based economy in the world, capable of sustainable economic growth, with more and better jobs and greater social cohesion, unless they significantly change their research policy, and particularly the budgets earmarked for this?

It is in this way, through public investment and guarantees to respect workers' rights, that we will achieve better levels of development, not by insisting on the liberalisation of key sectors and of essential public services or on flexible labour markets.

The recognition of women' s rights as an integral and indivisible component of universal human rights requires the adoption of accompanying measures which will allow this recognition to be transposed into concrete actions.

It also requires a subsequent evaluation of those measures, above all, so that they can be adapted in the event that they are not sufficiently effective.

This is why the Smet-Gröner report, and the proposals contained in it, are so opportune and correct. I have therefore voted in favour of it.

Of particular importance is the request for specific preventive measures and measures to promote women' s health and guarantee their right to genetic health, as long as this right is not understood to mean the right to abortion but rather the right to the protection of the health of the expectant mother and the unborn child.

With regard to the promotion of equal opportunities in the context of policies on cooperation with development, I would like to point out that, in my view, efforts in this area should concentrate especially on guaranteeing girls' access to primary education, which means at the same time ensuring that it is free.

However, I regret the fact that the amendment that I presented on behalf of the PPE has not been accepted.

The prevention of adolescent pregnancies demands, above all, that we educate the young in the values which stem from their essential sense of self-worth and teach them to enjoy their freedom in a responsible manner.

(PT) We voted in favour of this report because it highlights the most important aspects of our analysis of the follow-up to the Beijing Declaration and Action Platform.

We also think that the 2000 review process should in no way lead to a renegotiation of the commitments entered into in Beijing.

All the 12 key sectors are important and they must be tackled, given the sexual discrimination which exists in all areas, and since lack of progress in one sector will inevitably have repercussions on the other sectors.

We also believe that it is important to hold a further conference in five years' time with a view to assessing progress for women in the fields of equality, development and peace.

It is also of fundamental importance for the Council, the Commission and the Member States to do everything possible to combat violence against women, especially in the home, at the workplace, in society in general and in armed conflicts.

The report by Mrs Gröner and Mrs Smet gives me the opportunity to look again at a questionable action platform.

As well as containing a Malthusian ideology, the Beijing Action Platform uses means of implementation which we condemn.

The UN already intends to rule the world by imposing a uniform vision, based on the western model, on all the regions of the planet, regardless of their existing cultures and laws.

In addition, in order to bypass the rules arising from its intergovernmental nature which subjects it to approval by its Member States, the UN is using the NGOs which it finances in order to implement its programmes everywhere and with much fewer constraints.

Where countries are reluctant, it is using blackmail based on financial aid to obtain the application, for example, of birth control measures.

Although it is vital for the specific role of women to be recognised in all societies, this must occur with full respect for the local traditions and regulations which are commonly accepted and which do not in any way prevent the dignity of women from being respected.

Such an approach ensures that the people concerned have a better understanding of these broad international texts.

We have also discussed and voted on Mrs Sörensen' s report which deals with trafficking in women.

These two debates should make us stop and think about the real scope and aim of these major international platforms.

While they have succeeded in their aim of weakening still further the demography of western countries, they have not responded in a logical way to the more urgent question of protecting those women who are really in difficulty.

Once again, it is the ideology and egoism of some which have prevailed over concern for the common good. The culture of death has taken priority over the defence of life.

- The British Conservative Members decided to abstain in our vote on this report.

This should not be construed at all that we are not opposed to discrimination.

We are opposed to discrimination, we do believe in equality of treatment between men and women.

We do not accept, however, that the imposition of legal quotas is the way to achieve equality of treatment.

We think quotas of themselves institutionalise discrimination.

We believe that women the world over and especially here in Europe are making a valuable and positive contribution to the democratic process.

We are convinced that role will develop fully and effectively without 'progressive' or 'artificial means' .

On the issue of making contraceptives more widely available we voted against the amendment because we believe these are issues of personal morality and conscience and not an issue where the European Union should be making a political stand.

For these reasons we voted against certain amendments and abstained on the final vote.

- According to the World Health Organisation, the definition of the term "Reproductive Health" includes the term "fertility regulation" which contains "interrupting unwanted pregnancies" , i.e. abortion on demand.

In the interest of subsidiarity, paragraphs and related amendments dealing with reproductive health should not be included in an EP document, unless clearly and honestly defined.

There is a worldwide commonly agreed terminology which is "Primary Health Care" defined at the WHO conference in Alma Ata, 1978, which deals with Women and Mother' s Health without including abortion on demand.

Furthermore, in paragraph 18, the use of language leaves the meaning unclear and open to interpretation; prevention of "girl pregnancies" has the unfortunate double meaning of specifically seeking to prevent pregnancies where the conceived child is a girl.

Ambiguities such as this should not be allowed to stand in a report conceived as instructions for the negotiating team in New York for the remainder of the Beijing +5 session.

Regarding paragraph 26, which states that "the respect of women's rights should be one of the main conditions for the granting of aid and should be closely monitored in all external relations and cooperation" , the European Union must not tie any specifications to its distribution of aid nor impose any conditions for the reception of aid amongst women, realising that women are extremely vulnerable to the use of coercion and coercive techniques in order to realise their basic human rights such as shelter, nutrition, education and basic health care.

The EU must exercise extreme caution that current definitions should be consistent with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights as women are not a minority group.

The UEN Group decided to vote against the Gröner-Smet report for several reasons, one of which is the ideology behind Beijing +5.

We do not reject the whole report but we refuse to accept the ideological vision of women which it aims to impose on the world.

This vision which we reject relies on empirical assumptions. Firstly, we disagree with the principle of women being a factor of peace and we reject this image of a dove superimposed on that of a woman to become as one.

This makes men into hirsute and aggressive beings who are the source of all the world' s problems.

Furthermore, we do not believe that women can, by nature, be a factor of economic development.

Clearly, they can contribute to this and we must give them the means to do so.

However, we believe that, in the context of this debate, the absolute priority must be to provide education.

We also cannot accept the individualisation of human rights to be found in this report.

The UEN Group, although attached to the whole European tradition of human rights, cannot accept the individualisation of these rights where they represent only specific needs to which suitable responses must be provided.

A restrictive international instrument certainly cannot be based on false assumptions.

That concludes the explanations of vote.

(The sitting was suspended at 1.48 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m.)

The next item is the report (A5-0136/2000) by Mrs Buitenweg, on behalf of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, on the proposal for a Council Directive implementing the principle of equal treatment between persons irrespective of racial or ethnic origin (COM(1999) 566 - C5­0067/2000 - 1999/0253(CNS)).

Mr President, it was fifty years ago last week that Robert Schuman, with his speech, laid the foundation for the ECSC.

Meanwhile, coal and steel have ceased being the cornerstones of the integration process.

Over the past six months, it has become evident that values are increasingly at the centre of the debate.

Europe as a Community of values.

The importance of the directive which we are debating today threatens to become lost in the commotion about the time of issue of the French translation, the deadline for the amendments and our Rules of Procedure, whilst its very content will probably explain why we are all fighting so hard.

A couple of months ago, when the content had still not been specified, all parties agreed to a swift passage of this directive.

During the Portuguese Presidency, there has been a political momentum within the Council of which I, as well as other MEPs, would have liked to have made use.

Technical problems were deemed subordinate to political will at the time, and this is still true for the majority of MEPs.

Therefore, in addition to the draftspeople of the opinion, I would also like to thank a number of people by name for their extremely constructive contributions to the report. They are Mr Richard Howitt, rapporteur for the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs, Mrs Anne Van Lancker, Mrs Joke Swiebel, Mrs Sarah Ludford and Mr Arie Oostlander.

I would now like to move on to the Commission' s proposal.

It embodies a sound minimum level of protection against racism by means of sanctions and independent bodies, by which we set great store.

The Commissioner has done justice to the wide range of areas across which discrimination can manifest itself.

The directive covers both direct and indirect discrimination, as well as the term "harassment" .

My report also calls for the inclusion of incitement to discrimination.

This is, for example, the case if an employer asks a headhunting agency to be selective on improper grounds.

I hope that this addition can be adopted by the Commission.

Parliament has also looked very carefully into the areas to which this directive applies.

I have understood that some people in the Council are in favour of excluding asylum and migration policy, as well as the issuing of visas, from this ban on discrimination.

I hope that I have got the wrong end of the stick here.

Indeed, although a distinction based on nationality may be completely understandable, it would, of course, be quite improper to let the colour of someone' s skin be a deciding factor in their request for asylum or to treat the asylum request of a black person in distress differently from that of a white person.

These days, asylum and migration policy falls within the scope of the first pillar. The deliberate exclusion of this area could not therefore be justified.

A much-debated topic in this Parliament is the burden of proof.

Every Member State is by now familiar with this concept, whereby both the defendant and plaintiff have a role to play.

Indeed, the burden of proof has already shifted in cases where men and women are treated equally.

In this procedure, the plaintiff has to supply actual facts on the basis of which direct or indirect discrimination can be presumed, and the defendant subsequently needs to refute the charges.

This arrangement works well and has caused few problems.

Maybe those opposing this procedure could explain to me sometime during this debate why we nonetheless have to review it and, more specifically, why there is less protection against racial discrimination than against sex discrimination.

At the same time, I recognise the fact that even more protection is not essential.

I hope therefore that the House, in its wisdom, will decide tomorrow to adhere as far as possible to the Commission' s original text.

Unfortunately, statutory measures against racism are necessary.

They provide victims with protection and a right to redress.

But it is also important in the forming of attitudes.

It makes it clear that Europe will not stand for racism.

It is this message which this Parliament needs to broadcast.

Everyone is different, everyone is equal.

I note what you have said, Mr Ribeiro e Castro.

I do not think it was strictly speaking a point of order, but I have taken note of it.

President, as co-rapporteur for this, Europe' s first ever race directive, I and my party are proud to contribute to legislation which establishes common standards of protection for the victims of racial discrimination throughout our continent.

This will send a clear signal to the racist extreme right that they have no part in modern Europe and it closes the chapter of racism, anti-Semitism and xenophobia which tragically blighted our history in the century just past.

Racism is not an opinion - it is a crime.

The 24-year old black care worker set on fire in a racist attack in Britain, the 5 neo-Nazis convicted of beating two Vietnamese people in Germany, the French authorities cited by Amnesty International for torture of a Moroccan-Dutch national, all of which took place in Europe this very week are simply the most visible examples of racial discrimination which is the daily experience of black and ethnic minority Europeans in our businesses, communities and on our streets.

For example, the group from Watford in my constituency whom I met just last week, were witness to racist intimidation at a border post, which is sadly too routine even to be reported.

Let me be clear - today the European Parliament places on record our belief that this legislation will concretely tackle such racism.

The shift in the burden of proof because the discriminator holds all of the information will guarantee greater fairness in the way that complaints are heard.

The definition of indirect discrimination will enable covert action which is more pervasive, more insidious to be challenged and will permit implementation by genuinely independent bodies with sufficient funds to do their work so that our words are turned into reality.

The Commission for Racial Equality from the UK is just one example in Europe and I am pleased that some of the best lessons of the UK' s Race Relations Act alongside best practice from other Member States are being translated into European law today.

The European Parliament should be aware that the elements I have outlined are intrinsic to the legislation and that Mrs Buitenweg and myself have come to a clear understanding with the Portuguese Presidency that, in return for our cooperation in accelerating parliamentary approval, those elements will form a minimum in the final directive agreed.

Let me turn to the specific improvements we propose and which we expect to be accepted: that incitement or pressure to discriminate is banned just as much as the discrimination itself; that groups as well as individuals will be able to bring cases including a legal status for voluntary organisations to engage in civil dialogue, a partnership to implement the directive for the first time; that the scope of the new law is clearly applied to all public authorities; that conciliation is offered to resolve disputes without prejudice to the right of access to the courts; and that the effectiveness of the new law is tested one to two years, not five, following its implementation.

In addition, I ask the Commissioner to address specifically in her reply our additional demands for application of the principles of the directive in the policies and programmes of the EU itself. Second, to give public authorities the right to require companies to demonstrate compliance with anti-discrimination in awarding contracts.

Third, on the importance of statistical monitoring, if we are genuinely to combat discrimination.

Finally, I offer my sincere congratulations to Kathalijne Buitenweg for her work and I thank her for her cooperation in bringing this before Parliament.

Members should all acknowledge the campaign by the anti-racist movement throughout Europe.

National groups such as the UK Race and Europe Network in my country, the European Network against Racism and, in particular, the Starting Line group have worked for 20 years to get this legislation and for them today is still simply the beginning.

Mr President, I want to add my voice to those Members calling for the swift passage of this legislation through Parliament.

This is a Parliament with a proud record.

Since the 1980s we have led on action and on initiatives to combat racism, xenophobia and discrimination.

We now have, in the Buitenweg report, a unique opportunity to see those efforts incorporated into a package of legislation and an action plan.

I want to thank the rapporteur for incorporating the amendment by the Committee on Legal Affairs to extend the proposal to cover institutional racism.

We, too, believe that we have to see a ban on incitement to racism.

Groups and anti-racist organisations in my region, in the North-West of England, are eagerly awaiting this legislation.

For some of them, victims of racism, action cannot come quick enough and PPE pleading on respecting parliamentary procedure, I am afraid, will fall on deaf ears in my region' s organisations.

Racism is on the rise again.

We all have our local examples.

For example, in Liverpool an Asian scriptwriter was attacked, his car forced off the road and local thugs then tried to impale him on a fence spike.

So vicious was this attack that Merseyside police called for an urgent press conference.

The Jewish community in North Manchester are persistently the subject of victimisations and racism, their property defaced and they are subjected to racial threats and abuse.

This is why it is vital that Europe gives a strong public statement on racism and discrimination backed up by legislative action to ban this and to extend the scope of legal redress by shifting the burden of proof from the victim to the racist and allied groups and organisations to bring race discrimination cases to courts across the EU.

In voting through this report and its recommendations, this Parliament can give a strong signal that it is prepared to be tough on racism and tough on the causes and perpetrators of racism.

Those parties which seek to legitimise and promote racism and discrimination through the ballot box, and we have examples in many countries, should take note of this directive and incorporate the recommendations and its legal force in their own constitutions.

Firstly, I want to congratulate the Commission on this text.

Many of the basic principles we wanted to see are in it.

I also congratulate the Portuguese Presidency because they have pushed this through and given it their political clout to make sure we get it on the statute book because, as Mrs McCarthy has just said, people who are victims of racism cannot wait until all the procedures are sorted out.

They want this legislation quickly and they want it now.

That is why it is important that we vote this afternoon.

In the context of what has happened in Austria, it becomes even more important.

There are a few things which would add to and strengthen the text.

Two things I would like to highlight: Amendment No 29, which tries to make sure that there is no hiding place for racism, no hiding place behind considerations of religion, considerations of belief and considerations of nationality.

We need to make sure that these are not just covers for racism.

The second amendment, which is important, is the amendment on incitement to racial discrimination which is as important as the act of racism itself, and I hope the Commission will take it on board.

My own committee, the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, thought it particularly important that we make sure that the applicant states are aware of the legislation and are in a position to implement it as soon as possible.

I hope the Commission will make sure in the Action Programme, proposed to accompany this package, that we have a lot of projects from the applicant states.

This directive will have a direct impact on the lives of many constituents of mine in Yorkshire, people from ethnic minorities and many thousands of people across Europe.

It is very important that we get it through today.

I hope that at the end of the afternoon we will have no more shenanigans, no more delays and we will make sure we get the vote at 6 p.m. so that we can get it through before the end of the Portuguese Presidency.

Mr President, first and foremost, I would like to warmly congratulate Mrs Buitenweg on the fact that she managed to finish the entire report, ready for discussion and vote, at the eleventh hour today.

When I read the report and hear the discussions, I get a strong feeling of déjà vu.

Some 15 or 20 years ago in the Netherlands, I worked together with a Christian-Democrat member of government, Mrs Jeltien Kraaieveld, who was also involved in this anti-discrimination legislation in the field of discrimination based on sex.

All the points raised then, together with the hesitation and conflicts, have come up again now.

The hesitation mainly relates to what should and should not be included in the one report.

Then, too, we realised that it is better to address the types of discrimination one by one than to try to cram them all into one act or even one directive.

In addition, the rapporteur has persuaded me that it is preferable to leave out religion for that reason, because it merits a separate chapter.

What would really cap it all for me is if we could withdraw Amendments Nos 15 and 29, in which religion is portrayed in a bad light.

This would then render my Amendment No 63 redundant, where religion is seen in a positive light, as we would thus redress the balance and have a clean report.

Mr President, I think it is important in this context to bring up the issue of the 'distribution of the burden of proof' , also erroneously referred to as 'reversal of burden of proof' .

In the past, we have had huge arguments in the Netherlands about how this should be done and whether this could be done.

We finally concluded that it was necessary and that it should also be tied in with the establishment of an independent council or independent committee for equal treatment - in fact, one of my best former collaborators currently forms part of such a committee. This would then be able to look into the extent to which particular complaints should be taken seriously, whereupon we would go to court and, if appropriate, support the plaintiff.

It is then up to the party which is indicted to prove that we are wrong.

That is the type of distribution of the burden of proof which is not only already operational in most Member States in the case of men and women and, as from 2001, will have to be extended to include everybody, but which also already exists in legislation on the environment, for example.

There, too, a reversal of the burden of proof applies, if necessary, or so I was told by an expert in the field a moment ago.

Indeed, these are phenomena which are extremely difficult to prove and which, using the traditional method, an interested party can try to wriggle out of, usually successfully, even if this is completely unjustified.

It is to be welcomed if legislation develops in this respect.

The distribution of the burden of proof is an important point which should be looked into by a committee such as the one mentioned above. As such, on behalf of those in my Group who welcome this, I am strongly in favour of the parts of the report which pertain to this point.

It is, of course, the case that in the traditional forms of administration of justice, some employers or people playing important roles used to be in a strong position, or those forming part of a majority always took exception to anti-discrimination.

Distribution of the burden of proof will affect their position.

As a Christian-Democrat, I think we have to side with those who are most under threat, those in the weakest position. As such, this is a positive development, in my view.

Also, I very much applaud the rapporteur' s compromise to the effect that she is possibly prepared to reinstate in their original form those regulations which have been tightened up in ways not required by statute.

I consider this to be an important gesture, also vis-à-vis the Group of the European People' s Party (Christian Democrats) and European Democrats, and this I very much appreciate.

Regarding the other points of the report, I do have to say that the nature of a directive is such that you do not need to be too specific.

A directive needs to be incorporated into national legislation.

Naturally, one could say, what if some EU government or other lost its faculties, you would need to specify all the steps one by one.

I assume, Mr President, pursuant to the principles of subsidiarity, that this kind of mental breakdown will not affect Member States and that they will transpose this directive into national legislation in a proper and reasonable manner, so as to meet the objective.

This is, after all, the nature of the directive.

This does imply for our Group - and I am speaking on behalf of the entire group - that a number of points are redundant, something which, in fact, the rapporteur has already hinted at.

Let us weed them out and exclude them from the directive.

In addition, we do not need to include a number of bureaucratic procedures of how everything needs to be done step by step.

We will not be voting in favour of this, or rather, we will be voting against this.

But this does not affect the core of the report, Mr President, which is what this is all about.

Needless to say, there are a number of points which we do want included, such as, for example, the right to perusal of confidential information, or whether it is, for example, necessary to establish whether a business administration is not secretly committing systematic discrimination.

On behalf of part of my Group, I also find it extremely important that elections of employees representatives are clearly provided for.

Naturally, these too should be held free from discrimination based on race or ethnic origin.

We must strike up a social dialogue where this type of issue can be discussed.

This very much strengthens the concept of subsidiarity because, where anti-discrimination is concerned, we should start at the basis, the very place where social dialogue is extremely pertinent.

Mr President, discrimination, especially based on ethnicity and race, is of great concern to me because it touches the very core of the European Union and European integration.

This is what it is all about.

We are gathered here, people from different nations and of different origins, and we are working together.

This is what the pioneers of the European Union once did and we must translate this now into legislation such as is before us today.

As a Dutch person, I have to say that I am also moved by the discrimination issue involving generations of Dutch speakers, often fellow believers, who kept the apartheid regime in South Africa alive.

This has made us particularly alert and, in my opinion, we should take the warning we received from this historic learning process seriously.

I am delighted that this subject is now being discussed in a proper manner.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I am a Member of the group which has joined forces with the two rapporteurs, Mrs Kathalijne Buitenweg and Mr Richard Howitt, with a great deal of conviction in order to enable Parliament to deliver the parliamentary opinion on this Commission proposal this week, and I would like to thank the rapporteurs very explicitly and with all my heart for the extremely constructive spirit in which we have been able to work.

The Social Democrats in Parliament have fought doggedly to keep this item on the agenda and I am pleased that we managed to achieve this thanks to a sound proposal for compromise from the Liberals.

With all due sympathy and respect for the work which Mr Arie Oostlander and a number of delegates in the PPE-DE Group have put into this in order to win that group over too, I have to say that the continuous attempts at sabotage and procedural games which we have experienced here this week are, as far as I am concerned, proof that a hard core of conservative PPE-DE Members want nothing more than to undermine this report and the directive.

I am pleased, however, that we managed to stop them in their tracks.

We all know that the Portuguese Presidency is determined to bring this debate in the Council to a successful conclusion.

The majority of MEPs know very well why this directive is important.

By implementing the Treaty' s non-discrimination principle swiftly and forcefully, Europe wants to give out an unambiguous message to the citizens in our own countries and those in the candidate countries.

This is to prove that Europe is serious about the fight for equal opportunities, irrespective of people' s race or ethnic origin and also because it is a well-known fact that discrimination is still rife in our countries, and that there is still racism and extreme nationalism which, in fact, is more prominent than before because racist political parties are cashing in on the 'own nation first' ideas.

I know that the debate in the Council is also a difficult one.

It is precisely for this reason that it is important that the European Parliament strengthens and supports the Commission's position, because we will soon need a sound and efficient directive which fights any type of discrimination on the basis of racial and ethnic origin.

To finish off, I would like to highlight a number of my Group' s priorities in terms of content.

Firstly, it is extremely important for the non-discrimination directive to have a wide and efficient scope.

This is why we are very much in favour of extending the directive to groups of people who are discriminated against and also to areas such as housing, education, public service operations and attitudes within the police force.

We are also pleased with the solution which we finally reached regarding discrimination on the basis of religion which should not be a covert reason for discriminating on the basis of ethnic origin.

Secondly, in our opinion, the strength of this directive will stand or fall with its enforceability, the extent to which it monitors discrimination, the efficiency of the measures taken against discrimination and, as such, the importance we attach to the possibility of organising collective actions to tie sanctions in with the directive.

With all due respect and sympathy, Mr Oostlander, but since you refer to the cleaning-up operation, I notice that this is precisely one of those cornerstones of our reinforcement plan which is being removed.

I do not agree with this. This is taking it much too far.

Moreover, my Group also supports the reinforcement of, and support for, the operation of, those independent monitoring bodies.

I am convinced that the centre for equal opportunities in my own country will be encouraged in its activities by this directive.

I should like to finish off with one last consideration regarding the shared burden of proof because I am really at a loss to understand the resistance on the part of some people.

Surely it should be clear to everybody that it is impossible for a migrant who is discriminated against to prove that he is being discriminated against at work or by house owners, unless the defendant too is at least asked to prove that the facts brought by the plaintiff are unfounded.

We women are already familiar with this procedure.

This is why we have fought for such a long time for a directive which distributes this burden of proof, and all we men and women of the Group of the Party of European Socialists are asking for is for migrants to be treated in the same way as women.

This is why we will also support the Commission' s proposal and will not permit any amendments in this area.

I have just been told that we have a delegation from the City Council of Munich, the capital of the Land of Bavaria, in the public gallery.

It is my great pleasure to welcome our colleagues from local government, and I am delighted that you are so interested in our work!

I am delighted to have been able to work with Mrs Buitenweg.

She has done an excellent and inclusive job producing a balanced text, which usefully strengthens the Commission' s hand.

This proposed directive is a landmark for Europe.

It is right that Europe should be legislating to guarantee the fundamental right to dignity, irrespective of ethnicity, and not to suffer discrimination.

It is also timely for Europe to legislate now with the alarming rise in the Far Right and racist violence.

I want to highlight a few aspects of the text.

Firstly, the very significant inclusion of indirect and institutional racism, and amendments have strengthened that aspect.

Secondly, the specific inclusion of housing, health and other public authority functions, including policing.

This is not interference in national responsibilities, but an assertion that the non-discriminatory delivery of these services is a European concern.

Thirdly, the inclusion via Amendments Nos 15 and 29 of disguised race discrimination.

My Group is not favourable to the inclusion of religion or belief in the scope of this directive because that needs much more thought.

However, we believe unequal treatment should be caught if it only pretends to be based on religion or nationality but is, in fact, race discrimination pure and simple.

Fourthly, the inclusion, as has already been mentioned, of incitement or pressure to discriminate - that is very important.

Fifthly, the role of the European Union Monitoring Centre in assisting the Commission in monitoring the implementation of this directive - and I hope the Commission will welcome that.

Sixthly, although my Group understands the thinking behind Amendment No 38, the fact that it includes private clubs or associations is rather problematical.

To give you an example: I represent London and it could mean a problem for Caribbean people getting together to reminisce about life in the Caribbean in the 1950s if some white people were excluded.

I think that Amendment No 38 is not well drafted.

Lastly, on the adjustment of the burden of proof, and I am borrowing Mr Oostlander' s phrase here, because he is quite correct to refer to it as 'sharing' or a 'distribution' of the burden of proof. I am rather sorry that the Socialist Group insist on calling it a l of the burden of proof because that is slightly misleading.

It applies to the limited circumstances of equal opportunities law which is civil or administrative law.

My Group agrees that since the employer authority has most of the information, it must prove there has been no breach of equal treatment once the complainant has demonstrated a case.

Finally, there will be more heat than light from some speakers today and I am afraid I might include Mr Helmer of whose remarks I had a foretaste last night on the way back from the delightful asparagus dinner.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, three years after the Treaty of Amsterdam was adopted and the famous and much-debated Article 13 was introduced, the Council is proposing two directives to implement the principles of this Treaty.

We can only congratulate the Council' s willingness to make progress on this issue, particularly at a time when certain parties of the traditional right are starting to sign agreements with extreme-right movements. This has already happened in France, is now occurring in Austria and may soon happen in Italy.

The definition of a minimum European framework for the fight against discrimination is therefore urgently required.

The directive on the fight against racial and ethnic discrimination is heading in the right direction. In particular, it provides for the reversal of the burden of proof, the gradual establishment of positive discrimination - more effective than simple theoretical equality - and the recognition of indirect discrimination.

All these aspects reveal a clear desire to forge ahead.

However, certain shortcomings must be highlighted.

Some of these have been raised by our rapporteur, such as the issue of legal proceedings being free of charge for plaintiffs and the necessary extension of the right to take part in court proceedings to groups and associations.

There are also two other problems which I must raise.

The first is of a general nature.

How can the Council consider the issue of racial and ethnic discrimination without being committed to the creation of a comprehensive legislative framework for all discrimination?

Singling out one type of discrimination gives the impression that some types of discrimination are less reprehensible than others.

A second directive on discrimination at work is to be examined shortly.

The Council must therefore make haste and propose a draft directive encompassing all types of discrimination.

This is absolutely vital as the most excluded are those who suffer several types of discrimination.

Protecting them from just one type will only go part-way towards helping them.

The second problem concerns the exclusion of religious discrimination from this directive.

It is extremely regrettable that religious discrimination was not included with racial and ethnic discrimination as these different types of discrimination are closely linked.

For example, how do you define the Jewish identity?

Surely the hatred for Jews which remains significant in many countries is due as much to anti-Semitism, and therefore to ethnic origin, as to religious aspects.

Discrimination against North African communities in Europe is also two-sided.

It may even often be said that the fear of Islam acts as a catalyst for racism towards these communities.

Therefore, limiting this directive to racial and ethnic discrimination risks leaving the door open to ambiguities in interpretation with which the courts might struggle to deal.

To conclude, it is essential that the Council adopts an integrated approach towards the legal tools to be established in order to apply Article 13 in our daily life.

Dividing the fight against discrimination among a number of texts is dangerous for the overall coherence of the anti-discrimination mechanism and therefore weakens it.

Mr President, thank you for welcoming the members of local government who are the very people who will have to implement what we decide here.

But first of all, we have to do our work.

I would like to point out that the amendments mentioned by Baroness Ludford are still not available in all languages this afternoon.

Before we proceed to the vote, would you please get the Sittings Service to establish whether the 24-hour deadline applies here and whether or not we have to defer this until tomorrow?

I am not trying to start a debate on this subject now, but I would like you to clarify this once and for all, because there has been a lot of confusion here today.

Mr Posselt, we are used to confusion reigning in this House, but I will have this checked.

Mr President, this motion is positive and we will vote for it. However, its credibility will only be ensured if the Member States start by cleaning up their own acts.

For example, what credibility does Belgium have in this area when it is expelling large numbers of gypsy asylum-seekers to Slovakia and Bulgaria, despite Parliament' s recommendations and the express request of the European Court of Human Rights?

What credibility do the Member States have when they are discriminating in their civil services against the recruitment of third country nationals, thus condemning the immigrants who they do employ to constant uncertainty?

What credibility does France have when a draft constitutional act recommending that immigrants from third countries be given the right to vote in local elections, adopted in the National Assembly on 3 May, is now being blocked by the hostility of the Senate and the President and the unwillingness of the government?

How can we claim to be protecting from discrimination those to whom we refuse any citizenship?

Discrimination will only be effectively combated when governments stop using double talk.

However, this text is a step forward on which we must build.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, it would have been a good thing if the European Parliament had made a positive, informative and decisive contribution to the proposal for a Council directive, in line with the impetus given by the Portuguese Presidency.

Unfortunately, it is not evident that that has happened.

On some points, the amendments involve precise improvements to the text in question.

In addition to details, I myself wish to refer to the right of collective action, legal assistance and other aspects which are already covered by Portuguese law.

However, in key areas, the amendments that we are debating could potentially wreck everything.

It seems that the rapporteurs and others who support them have wanted to go too far, and in their desire to do so they may seriously affect the entire proposal.

There are three points that particularly worry us: the reversal of the burden of proof, which has not been clarified, and the issues of nationality and religion.

Reversal of the burden of proof is already a very sensitive matter in its own right.

Even so, there are areas in which it is clearly justified, but it is unacceptable that instead of applying the classic principle of in dubio pro reo, this is to be replaced by a principle of in dubio pro auctore, especially when there is no explanation as to whether this reversal is to apply to criminal justice cases, and we know that there are cases in this area that can come under the criminal justice system.

This would amount to a violation of the fundamental principles of our legal system and of basic rights of trial formulated in Latin, that is to say based on Roman law.

Secondly, there is the issue of nationality.

We Portuguese can perhaps boast the richest mix of blood and ethnic origins in the course of history.

I myself and my circle of friends have not the faintest idea of our ethnic background.

We would be a real puzzle for a Nazi investigator or for the chart of ethnic origins which Baroness Ludford admired so much a few weeks ago in another report.

We are familiar with the concept of racism, which has no impact on us, although we must combat it. Above all, we must firmly combat racist violence.

But it is important not to confuse separate issues.

In other words, ethnicity is one issue and nationality is another.

If there is discrimination between a black person and a white person, or vice versa, for example if someone discriminates against a white Portuguese in favour of a black Portuguese, or against a black Portuguese in favour of a white Portuguese, this is clearly unlawful racism and should result in prosecution.

However, when it comes to applying for a particular post, if a Portuguese, be he Asian, black or white, is suitable for that job, in a way that does not apply to a Zimbabwean, be he Asian, black or white, then this is not a question of racism, it is about citizenship, and this can be legitimate.

The problem is that in many of the amendments these two concepts are confused, with potentially disastrous effects, particularly in areas such as public service, and even in other, unexpected areas.

The other vital area is religion.

We wish to make it clear that freedom of religious organisation is a fundamental civil right, which cannot be undermined, curbed or jeopardised, which would be the effect of some of the amendments before us.

Mr President, it is with mixed feelings that I am making my contribution to this debate.

This is largely to do with the way in which the discussion of this report has been forced upon us, against normal procedures.

Needless to say, I subscribe to the importance of equal treatment of persons irrespective of racial and ethnic origin.

But it is precisely because this is such an important topic that Parliament, and especially the Portuguese Presidency, would have done well to have set more time aside for it.

The enactment of the general act on equal treatment cost the Netherlands blood, sweat and tears at the time.

I am sure that other Member States have had similar experiences and these experiences should remind us to exercise caution and do our homework before discussing this draft directive.

This will require the necessary time, not least because the implementation of the current proposal will have a ripple effect within existing legislation and systems within the different Member States. The change in the burden of proof is just one example of this.

Parliament' s amendment takes the Commission' s proposal one step further.

The Commission specifies that the principle of subsidiarity is still being enforced, but I question that.

The directive is said to have a supplementary function with regard to the political signal it sends out.

But this type of signal is being emitted with just as much power by long-standing national legislation, which is a great deal closer to the citizen, and by the widely known ECHR.

An in-depth discussion would have been desirable, certainly given the far-reaching consequences which this legislation can have on legislation and legal systems within the Member States and the fact that it will infringe on the Member States' sovereignty.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, dismayed as I am about the way the 14 Member States have prejudged Austria, I particularly welcome the Commission proposal.

It goes without saying that the principle of equal treatment of persons irrespective of racial or ethnic origin should be applied.

There is no place for discrimination on these grounds in a modern society.

However, it is possible to overshoot the mark, even in the case of such an uncontroversial issue.

The reversal of the burden of proof proposed by the Commission would mean imposing an intolerable burden on small- and medium-sized enterprises in particular, as they would in future have to keep a record of every job interview, so that in serious cases they would be able to provide proof.

Arrangements like this do not result in greater understanding for the victims of discrimination.

Quite the opposite - it actually harms the cause.

The precision of the impact assessment form annexed to the Commission proposal is totally dependent on the use of the phrase "without apparent difficulty" .

The wording is as follows: "identical rules have already been applied without apparent difficulty" .

Mr President, I think that it is important and that it will simplify the debate if the honourable members know how the Commission has dealt with Parliament' s proposal, as far as the acceptance of amendments is concerned.

As the House knows, I - as the Commissioner responsible - presented an anti-discrimination package a few months ago, containing two directives and a programme.

Today we are discussing one of these two directives and, allow me to say that this is only possible thanks to the brilliant collaboration and highly efficient work of the two parliamentary committees, the endeavours of which, I think, surpass all expectations.

This particularly complicated directive, which has multiple repercussions, involves national peculiarities and different views, and to which all the committees involved have made various contributions, has evolved into a report and a consensus has been found.

I should like to congratulate Mrs Buitenweg and Mr Howitt and everyone else involved, as well as the Portuguese Presidency.

I believe that this conference is of historic importance for two reasons: first, because the demand for this sort of legislative act was tabled over twenty years ago.

Social groups, political parties, parliaments, MEPs and international conferences have proposed and have insisted that we legislate against the huge issue of racism and the conduct of organised society.

Twenty years on, it is now coming true. We are here discussing this directive.

The second reason is that, because of the current political climate, because of the political problems which have arisen within the Union over recent months in connection with racist clashes at political and social level, today' s piece of work is the first to go beyond words, to go beyond resolutions and general political expression to specific policy making.

The European Commission has worked quickly following the presentation of your committee' s report, with the collaboration of all the services involved, and I am pleased to say that over half the amendments have been accepted either in spirit or in part.

I must stress that the amendments which have not been accepted have mainly been rejected for administrative or legal reasons or because we know from our experience and from our collaboration over the years that the Council is sure to reject them.

As you know, our basis is Article 13 and it is an article which limits our room for manoeuvre.

I should like to comment on a number of amendments.

I am pleased to say that we agree with the amendments to incorporate the sexual dimension (Amendments Nos 7 and 59), the amendments to the material and personal scope (Amendments Nos 5, 30, 31, 34, 36 and 37) and the amendment on taking positive action (Amendment No 40).

We also agree with the idea of conciliation procedures in Amendment No 42, consultation with governmental organisations (Amendments Nos 21, 50 and 51) and with the amendments relating to previous acts of the European Parliament and the Council (Amendments Nos 3, 4, 8, 9 and 12).

I also agree with your proposal to define the role of the European Monitoring Centre - as contained in Amendment No 59 - although I should point out that our experience at the Commission tells us that the submission of reports by Member States every two years is a particularly demanding task and will not enable us to correctly assess the impact of the policies developed.

You also propose to amend the definition of indirect discrimination and one of the speakers also mentioned this.

I agree with the points made in the amendments and you may be sure that we shall use them to help formulate the definition in line with the interpretation of the European Court of Justice in the O' Flynn case.

I should like to say a few words to clarify the article on balancing the burden of proof proposed in amendment 43, even though the debate and the Council have made it clear that there will be problems in getting it accepted.

However, I should like to point out - because the Commission agrees with this approach - that a similar discussion was held several years ago along the same lines on the subject of discrimination between the sexes.

At that time, too, there was a great deal of concern about the repercussions which this would also have in the courts, where it was feared that a large number of cases would be filed, and in companies.

After many years in application, we have seen that these fears were unfounded and that there were no problems.

I think, therefore, that we can use this experience and be bold enough to take this approach.

I agree - and I welcome your persistence - that the directive should apply to all persons present on the territory of the Member States and not only to Community citizens.

I also agree with the proposal to make it clear that the directive will apply to natural and legal persons, but I must point out that your reference to non-formalised groups of persons cannot be incorporated because this concept is not legally recognised.

The content of the concept is understandable on merit, but it has not yet been legally recognised and will cause numerous problems.

I should also like to refer to an issue which appears to be of particular importance to the House; I refer to the distinction between racial and ethnic origin on the one hand and religious conviction on the other.

Long discussions were held in the Commission when the proposal was drawn up as to whether a ban on discrimination on the grounds of religion should be included in this directive.

We understand the argument that it is often difficult to make a clear distinction.

This frequently applies in the workplace, mainly because there are problems in relation to prayer facilities, obtaining permission for religious events and special dietary requirements in the workplace, which is why the second directive in the package, which relates to employment issues and discrimination in the workplace, makes clearer mention of discrimination on the grounds of religion.

But we do understand how difficult and how complicated the issue will become if we have an extensive ban on discrimination on the grounds of religion, for example in education.

And how difficult it will be to negotiate the directive with the Member States, where there are diametrically opposed approaches.

However, we welcome the approach which you have taken, i.e. the fact that Amendments Nos 15 and 29 point out that some people will probably try to interpret discrimination on the grounds of racial origin as discrimination on the grounds of religion and I agree that the directive must be strengthened on this point and that the Member States must also clearly draw the attention of the courts and other competent authorities to this danger when dealing with the issue of the right to take legal action against discrimination.

I should also like to comment briefly on independent agencies.

I agree with some of the ideas for their role which you put forward, especially the need for them to be independent, but we cannot specify how they are to be organised or how they are to operate because that is a question for the Member States themselves.

The number of amendments which has actually been accepted is very large and I imagine that we agree that we need to examine how these ideas can be incorporated into an amended proposal so that we retain the structure and balance in the text and the proposal has some chance of being approved by the Council, because I think that, for all of us, the best balance is between what we want and what is feasible.

I should like to refer very briefly to the more basic amendments which we are unable to accept.

The first concerns your reservations on the exclusion from the draft of a detailed reference to specific services, such as the police or the judicial authorities.

As the rapporteur rightly pointed out, the directive may only intervene where there is Community jurisdiction.

This does not apply in the case of judicial assistance in criminal matters and in the case of police cooperation, both of which come within the scope of the Treaty on the European Union.

We therefore agree with the reference in Amendment No 37 to public bodies in general but cannot agree to the specific reference to the police and judicial authorities.

A few words now on the huge issue of special problems in the area of immigration policies and asylum policies. The Commission prefers to follow a gradual approach due to the complexity of the issue and, when processing specific legislative measures on admission policies in these two areas, i.e. asylum and immigration, the Commission will evaluate the situation and decide to what extent the inclusion of an ad hoc clause against discrimination would be the most suitable response.

There are other points, such as public procurement, where the framework prohibits such criteria from creeping in, the issue of statistics, where I acknowledge and support your fear of a shortage of statistics - one of the basic objectives of the action programme is to create databases at European level - and finally, our obligation, as European institutions, to apply the same rules as those which we propose for the Member States.

